---
title: 28. Breakpoints: the pause all block

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 16
parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

---

### Breakpoints: the pause all block

![](image117.png){width="0.8194444444444444in"
height="0.2152777777777778in"}The pause button is great if your program
seems to be in an infinite loop, but more often you'll want to set a
*breakpoint,* a particular point in a script at which you want to pause.
The block, near the bottom of the Control palette, can be inserted in a
script to pause when it is run. So, for example, if your program is
getting an error message in a particular block, you could use pause all
just before that block to look at the values of variables just before
the error happens.

![](image118.png){width="1.8833333333333333in"
height="0.9111111111111111in"}The pause all block turns bright cyan
while paused. Also, during the pause, you can right-click on a running
script and the menu that appears will give you the option to show
watchers for temporary variables of the script:

But what if the block with the error is run many times in a loop, and it
only errors when a particular condition is true---say, the value of some
variable is negative, which shouldn't ever happen. In the iteration
library (see page 25 for more about how to use libraries) is a
breakpoint block that lets you set a *conditional* breakpoint, and
automatically display the relevant variables before pausing. Here's a
sample use of it:

![](image119.png){width="1.1944444444444444in"
height="1.3333333333333333in"}(In this contrived example, variable zot
comes from outside the script but is relevant to its behavior.) When you
continue (with the pause button), the temporary variable watchers are
removed by this breakpoint block before resuming the script. The
breakpoint block isn't magic; you could alternatively just put a pause
all inside an if.[^2]

