        ---
        title: 6. Inter-Sprite Communication with Broadcast

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 5
        parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

        ---

### Inter-Sprite Communication with Broadcast

Earlier we saw an example of two sprites moving at the same time. In a
more interesting program, though, the sprites on stage will *interact*
to tell a story, play a game, etc. Often one sprite will have to tell
another sprite to run a script. Here's a simple example:

![](image40.png){width="1.71875in"
height="0.24938648293963256in"}![](image41.png){width="0.5694444444444444in"
height="1.1111111111111112in"}
![](image42.png){width="2.78417760279965in"
height="1.5104166666666667in"}
![](image43.png){width="1.2430555555555556in"
height="0.8611111111111112in"}
![](image44.png){width="1.5208333333333333in"
height="0.6041666666666666in"}

![](image45.png){width="1.7895833333333333in"
height="0.2in"}![](image46.png){width="1.8in"
height="0.19166666666666668in"}In the block, the word "bark" is just an
arbitrary name I made up. When you click on the downward arrowhead in
that input slot, one of the choices (the only choice, the first time) is
"new," which then prompts you to enter a name for the new broadcast.
When this block is run, the chosen message is sent to *every* sprite,
which is why the block is called "broadcast." (But if you click the
right arrow after the message name, the block becomes , and you can
change it to Â to send the message just to one sprite.) In this program,
though, only one sprite has a script to run when that broadcast is sent,
namely the dog. Because the boy's script uses broadcast and wait rather
than just broadcast, the boy doesn't go on to his next say block until
the dog's script finishes. That's why the two sprites take turns
talking, instead of both talking at once. In Chapter VII,
"Object-Oriented Programming with Sprites," you'll see a more flexible
way to send a message to a specific sprite using the tell and ask
blocks.

Notice, by the way, that the say block's first input slot is rectangular
rather than oval. This means the input can be any text string, not only
a number. In text input slots, a space character is shown as a brown
dot, so that you can count the number of spaces between words, and in
particular you can tell the difference between an empty slot and one
containing spaces. The brown dots are *not* shown on the stage if the
text is displayed.

The stage has its own scripting area. It can be selected by clicking on
the Stage icon at the left of the sprite corral. Unlike a sprite,
though, the stage can't move. Instead of costumes, it has *backgrounds:*
pictures that fill the entire stage area. The sprites appear in front of
the current background. In a complicated project, it's often convenient
to use a script in the stage's scripting area as the overall director of
the action.

