---
title: 22. Transient variables

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 13
parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

---

### Transient variables

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image114.png" style="width:124px; height:101px">
So far we've talked about variables with
numeric values, or with short text strings such as someone's name. But
there's no limit to the amount of information you can put in a variable;
in Chapter IV you'll see how to use *lists* to collect many values in
one data structure, and in Chapter VIII you'll see how to read
information from web sites. When you use these capabilities, your
project may take up a lot of memory in the computer. If you get close to
the amount of memory available to Snap*!*, then it may become impossible
to save your project. (Extra space is needed temporarily to convert from
Snap*!* 's internal representation to the form in which projects are
exported or saved.) If your program reads a lot of data from the outside
world that will still be available when you use it next, you might want
to have values containing a lot of data removed from memory before
saving the project. To do this, right-click or control-click on the
orange oval in the Variables palette, to see this menu:

You already know about the rename options, and help... displays a help
screen about variables in general. Here we're interested in the check
box next to transient. If you check it, this variable's value will not
be saved when you save your project. Of course, you'll have to ensure
that when your project is loaded, it recreates the needed value and sets
the variable to it.

