        ---
        title: 118. The Palette Area

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 71
        parent: User Interface Elements

        ---

 The Palette Area
----------------

At the top of the palette area are the eight buttons that select which
palette (which block category) is shown: Motion, Looks, Sound, Pen,
Control, Sensing, Operators, and Variables (which also includes the List
and Other blocks). There are no menus behind these buttons.

### Buttons in the Palette

![](image1043.png){width="0.2604166666666667in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}Under the eight palette selector buttons,
at the top of the actual palette, are two semi-transparent buttons. The
first is the *search* button, which is equivalent to typing control-F:
It replaces the palette with a search bar into which you can type part
of the title text of the block you're trying to find. To leave this
search mode, click one of the eight palette selectors, or type the
Escape key.

![](image1044.png){width="0.2604166666666667in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}The other button is equivalent to the
"Make a block" button, except that the dialog window that it opens has
the current palette (color) preselected.

### Context Menus for Palette Blocks

![](image1045.png){width="0.8611111111111112in"
height="0.45902777777777776in"}Most elements of the Snap*!* display can
be control-clicked/right-clicked to show a *context menu,* with items
relevant to that element. If you control-click/right-click a *primitive*
block in the palette, you see this menu:

The help... option displays a box with documentation about the block.
Here's an example:

![](image1046.png){width="1.6229166666666666in"
height="0.8888888888888888in"}![](image1047.png){width="3.3222222222222224in"
height="2.4277777777777776in"}If you control-click/right-click a
*custom* (user-defined) block in the palette, you see this menu:

The help... option for a custom block displays the comment, if any,
attached to the custom block's hat block in the Block Editor. Here is an
example of a block with a comment and its help display:

![](image1048.png){width="6.758333333333334in"
height="2.451388888888889in"}If the help text includes a URL, it is
clickable and will open the page in a new tab.

The delete block definition... option asks for confirmation, then
deletes the custom block and removes it from any scripts in which it
appears. (The result of this removal may not leave a sensible script;
it's best to find and correct such scripts *before* deleting a block.)
Note that there is no option to *hide* a custom block; this can be done
in the Block Editor by right-clicking on the hat block.

The duplicate block definition... option makes a *copy* of the block and
opens that copy in the Block Editor. Since you can't have two custom
blocks with the same title text and input types, the copy is created
with "(2)" (or a higher number if necessary) at the end of the block
prototype.

The export block definition... option writes a file in your browser's
downloads directory containing the definition of this block and any
other custom blocks that this block invokes, directly or indirectly. So
the resulting file can be loaded later without the risk of red
Undefined! blocks because of missing dependencies.

The edit... option opens a Block Editor with the definition of the
custom block.

