        ---
        title: 140. Sprites

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 82
        parent: User Interface Elements

        ---

### Sprites

![](image1106.png){width="0.6013888888888889in"
height="1.0833333333333333in"}Most sprites can be moved by clicking and
dragging them. (If you have unchecked the draggable checkbox for a
sprite, then dragging it has no effect.) Control-clicking/right-clicking
a sprite shows this context menu:

The duplicate option makes another sprite with copies of the same
scripts, same costumes, etc., as this sprite. The new sprite starts at a
randomly chosen position different from the original, so you can see
quickly which is which. The new sprite is *selected:* It becomes the
current sprite, the one shown in the scripting area. The clone option
makes a permanent clone of this sprite, with some shared attributes, and
selects it.

The delete option deletes the sprite. It's not just hidden; it's gone
for good. (But you can undelete it by clicking the wastebasket just
below the right edge of the stage.) The edit option selects the sprite.
It doesn't actually change anything about the sprite, despite the name;
it's just that making changes in the scripting area will change this
sprite.

![](image1107.png){width="0.6527777777777778in"
height="0.8888888888888888in"}The move option shows a "move handle"
inside the sprite (the diagonal striped square in the middle):

You can ordinarily just grab and move the sprite without this option,
but there are two reasons you might need it: First, it works even if the
"draggable" checkbox above the scripting area is unchecked. Second, it
works for part sprites relative to their anchor; ordinarily, dragging a
part moves the entire nested sprite.

The rotate option displays a rotation menu:

![](image1108.png){width="0.9333333333333333in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}You can choose one of the four compass
directions in the lower part (the same as in the point in direction
block) or use the mouse to rotate the handle on the dial in 15Â°
increments.

![](image1109.png){width="0.6527777777777778in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}The pivot option shows a crosshair inside
the sprite:

You can click and drag the crosshair anywhere onstage to set the
costume's pivot point. (If you move it outside the sprite, then turning
the sprite will revolve as well as rotate it around the pivot.) When
done, click on the stage not on the crosshair. Note that, unlike moving
the pivot point in the Paint Editor, this technique does not visibly
move the sprite on the stage. Instead, the values of x position and y
position will change.

The edit option makes this the selected sprite, highlighting it in the
sprite corral and showing its scripting area. If the sprite was a
temporary clone, it becomes permanent.

The export... option saves, or opens a new browser tab containing, the
XML text representation of the sprite. (Not just its costume, but all of
its costumes, scripts, local variables and blocks, and other
properties.) You can save this tab into a file on your computer, and
later import the sprite into another project. (In some browsers, the
sprite is directly saved into a file.)

### <img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1110.png" style="width:92px; height:139px">Variable watchers

Right-clicking on a variable watcher shows this menu:

The first section of the menu lets you choose one of three
visualizations of the watcher:

![](image1111.png){width="2.3159722222222223in"
height="0.3263888888888889in"}

The first (normal) visualization is for debugging. The second (large) is
for displaying information to the user of a project, often the score in
a game. And the third (slider) is for allowing the user to control the
program behavior interactively. When the watcher is displayed as a
slider, the middle section of the menu allows you to control the range
of values possible in the slider. It will take the minimum value when
the slider is all the way to the left, the maximum value when all the
way to the right.

The third section of the menu allows data to be passed between your
computer and the variable. The import... option will read a computer
text file. Its name must end with .txt, in which case the text is read
into the variable as is, or .csv or .json, in which case the text is
converted into a list structure, which will always be a two-dimensional
array for csv (comma-separated values) data, but can be any shape for
json data. The raw data... option prevents that conversion to list form.
The export... option does the opposite conversion, passing a text-valued
variable value into a .txt file unchanged, but converting a list value
into csv format if the list is one- or two-dimensional, or into json
format if the list is more complicated. (The scalar values within the
list must be numbers and/or text; lists of blocks, sprites, costumes,
etc. cannot be exported.)

An alternative to using the import... option is simply to drag the file
onto the Snap*!* window, in which case a variable will be created if
necessary with the same name as the file (but without the extension).

If the value of the variable is a list, then the menu will include an
additional blockify option; clicking it will generate an expression with
nested list blocks that, if evaluated, will reconstruct the list. It's
useful if you imported a list and then want to write code that will
construct the same list later.

###  The stage itself

Control-clicking/right-clicking on the stage background (that is,
anywhere on the stage except on a sprite or watcher) shows the stage's
own context menu:

![](image1117.png){width="0.8215277777777777in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}The stage's edit option selects the stage,
so the stage's scripts and backgrounds are seen in the scripting area.
Note that when the stage is selected, some blocks, especially the Motion
ones, are not in the palette area because the stage can't move.

The show all option makes all sprites visible, both in the sense of the
show block and by bringing the sprite onstage if it has moved past the
edge of the stage.

The pic... option saves, or opens a browser tab with, a picture of
everything on the stage: its background, lines drawn with the pen, and
any visible sprites. What you see is what you get. (If you want a
picture of just the background, select the stage, open its costumes tab,
control-click/right-click on a background, and export it.)

The pen trails option creates a new costume for the currently selected
sprite consisting of all lines drawn on the stage by the pen of any
sprite. The costume's rotation center will be the current position of
the sprite.

If you previously turned on the log pen vectors option, and there are
logged vectors, the menu includes an extra option, svg..., that exports
a picture of the stage in vector format. Only lines are logged, not
color regions made with the fill block.

