---
title: 142. The Sprite Corral and Sprite Creation Buttons

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 83
parent: User Interface Elements

---

The Sprite Corral and Sprite Creation Buttons
---------------------------------------------

![](image1077.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.20555555555555555in"}![](image1118.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}![](image1119.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}Between the stage and the sprite corral
at the bottom right of the Snap*!* window is a dark grey bar containing
three buttons at the left and one at the right. The first three are used
to create a new sprite. The first button makes a sprite with just the
turtle costume, with a randomly chosen position and pen color. (If you
hold down the Shift key while clicking, the new sprite's direction will
also be random.) The second button makes a sprite and opens the Paint
Editor so that you can make your own costume for it. (Of course you
could click the first button and then click the paint button in its
costumes tab; this paint button is a shortcut for all that.) Similarly,
the third button uses your camera, if possible, to make a costume for
the new sprite.

The trash can button
![](image1120.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.1736111111111111in"} at the right has two uses. You can drag a
sprite thumbnail onto it from the sprite corral to delete that sprite,
or you can click it to undelete a sprite you deleted by accident.

In the sprite corral, you click on a sprite's "thumbnail" picture to
select that sprite (to make it the one whose scripts, costumes, etc. are
shown in the scripting area). You can drag sprite thumbnails (but not
the stage one) to reorder them; this has no special effect on your
project, but lets you put related ones next to each other, for example.
Double-clicking a thumbnail flashes a halo around the actual sprite on
the stage.

You can right-click/control-click a sprite's thumbnail to get this
context menu:

![](image1121.png){width="0.6770833333333334in"
height="1.1090277777777777in"}The show option makes the sprite visible,
if it was hidden, and also brings it onto the stage, if it had moved
past the stage boundary. The next three options are the same as in the
context menu of the actual sprite on the stage, discussed above.

The parent... option displays a menu of all other sprites, showing which
if any is this sprite's parent, and allowing you to choose another
sprite (replacing any existing parent). The release option is shown only
if this sprite is a (permanent, or it wouldn't be in the sprite corral)
clone; it changes the sprite to a temporary clone. (The name is supposed
to mean that the sprite is released from the corral.) The export...
option exports the sprite, like the same option on the stage.

The context menu for the stage thumbnail has only one option, pic...,
which takes a picture of everything on the stage, just like the same
option in the context menu of the stage background. If pen trails are
being logged, there will also be an svg... option.

If your project includes scenes, then under the stage icon in the sprite
corral will be the *scene corral:*

![](image1122.png){width="3.3333333333333335in"
height="1.7083333333333333in"}Clicking on a scene will select it;
right-clicking will present a menu in which you can rename, delete, or
export the scene.

Preloading a Project when Starting Snap*!*
------------------------------------------

There are several ways to include a pointer to a project in the URL when
starting Snap*!* in order to load a project automatically. You can think
of such a URL as just running the project rather than as running
Snap*!*, especially if the URL says to start in presentation mode and
click the green flag. The general form is

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#***verb***:***project***&***flag***&***flag***...

The "verb" above can be any of open, run, cloud, present, or dl. The
last three are for shared projects in the Snap*!* cloud; the first two
are for projects that have been exported and made available anywhere on
the Internet.

Here's an example that loads a project stored at the Snap*!* web site
(not the Snap*!* cloud!):

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#open:http://snap.berkeley.edu/snapsource/Examples/vee.xml

The project file will be opened, and Snap*!* will start in edit mode
(with the program visible). Using \#run: instead of \#open: will start
in presentation mode (with only the stage visible) and will "start" the
project by clicking the green flag. ("Start" is in quotation marks
because there is no guarantee that the project includes any scripts
triggered by the green flag. Some projects are started by typing on the
keyboard or by clicking a sprite.)

If the verb is run, then you can also use any subset of the following
flags:

&editMode Start in edit mode, not presentation mode.

&noRun Don't click the green flag.

&hideControls Don't show the row of buttons above the stage (edit mode,
green flag, pause, stop).

&lang=fr Set language to (in this example) French.

&noCloud Don't allow cloud operations from this project (for running
projects from unknown

sources that include JavaScript code)

&noExitWarning When closing the window or loading a different URL, don't
show the browser

"are you sure you want to leave this page" message.

&blocksZoom=n Like the Zoom blocks option in the Settings menu.

The last of these flags is intended for use on a web page in which a
Snap*!* window is embedded.

Here's an example that loads a shared (public) project from the Snap*!*
cloud:

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#present:Username=jens&ProjectName=tree%20animation

(Note that "Username" and "ProjectName" are TitleCased, even though the
flags such as "noRun" are camelCased. Note also that a space in the
project name must be represented in Unicode as %20.) The verb present
behaves like run: it ordinarily starts the project in presentation mode,
but its behavior can be modified with the same four flags as for run.
The verb cloud (yes, we know it's not a verb in its ordinary use)
behaves like open except that it loads from the Snap*!* cloud rather
than from the Internet in general. The verb dl (short for "download")
does not start Snap*!* but just downloads a cloud-saved project to your
computer as an .xml file. This is useful for debugging; sometimes a
defective project that Snap*!* won't run can be downloaded, edited, and
then re-saved to the cloud.

