---
title: 120. Context Menu for the Palette Background

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 72
parent: User Interface Elements

---

### Context Menu for the Palette Background

![](image1052.png){width="0.9895833333333334in"
height="0.5895833333333333in"}Right-click/control-click on the grey
*background* of the palette area shows this menu:

![](image1053.png){width="1.6in"
height="2.1597222222222223in"}The find blocks... option does the same
thing as the magnifying-glass button. The hide blocks... option opens a
dialog box in which you can choose which blocks (custom as well as
primitive) should be hidden. (Within that dialog box, the context menu
of the background allows you to check or uncheck all the boxes at once.)

The make a category... option, which is intended mainly for authors of
snap extensions, lets you add custom *categories* to the palette. It
opens a small dialog window in which you specify a name *and a color*
for the new category:

![](image1054.png){width="1.429861111111111in"
height="2.9097222222222223in"}![](image1055.png){width="1.53in"
height="1.13in"}Pick a dark color, because it will be lightened for
zebra coloring when users nest blocks of the same category. Custom
categories are shown below the built-in categories in the category
selector:

![](image1056.png){width="1.35in"
height="1.8395833333333333in"}This example comes from Eckart Modrow's
SciSnap*!* library. Note that the custom category list has its own
scroll bar, which appears if you have more than six custom categories.
Note also that the buttons to select a custom category occupy the full
width of the palette area, unlike the built-in categories, which occupy
only half of the width. Custom categories are listed in alphabetical
order; this is why Prof. Modrow chose to start each category name with a
number, so that he could control their order.

If there are no blocks visible in a category, the category name is
dimmed in the category selector:

Here we see that category foo has blocks in it, but categories bar and
garply are empty. The built-in categories are also subject to dimming,
if all of the blocks of a category are hidden.

**\
Palette Resizing**

At the right end of the palette area, just to the left of the scripting
area, is a resizing
handle![](image1057.png){width="1.4166666666666667in"
height="1.5138888888888888in"} that can be dragged rightward to increase
the width of the palette area. This is useful if you write custom blocks
with very long names. You can't reduce the width of the palette below
its standard value.

