---
title: Section 180. Keyboard Editing
layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 105
parent: Chapter 14. Procedures as Data
---

Keyboard Editing

An ongoing area of research is how to make visual programming languages
usable by people with visual or motoric disabilities. As a first step in
this direction, we provide a keyboard editor, so that you can create and
edit scripts without tracking the mouse. So far, not every user
interface element is controllable by keyboard, and we haven't even begun
providing *output* support, such as interfacing with a speech
synthesizer. This is an area in which we know we have a long way to go!
But it's a start. The keyboard editor may also be useful to anyone who
can type faster than they can drag blocks.

### Starting and stopping the keyboard editor

There are three ways to start the keyboard editor. Shift-clicking
anywhere in the scripting area will start the editor at that point:
either editing an existing script or, if you shift-click on the
background of the scripting area, editing a new script at the mouse
position. Alternatively, typing shift-enter will start the editor on an
existing script, and you can use the tab key to switch to another
script. Or you can click the keyboard button at the top of the scripting
area.

When the script editor is running, its position is represented by a
blinking white bar:

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1095.png" style="width:212px; height:153px">
To leave the keyboard editor, type the escape key, or
just click on the background of the scripting area.

### Navigating in the keyboard editor

To move to a different script, type the tab key. Shift-tab to move
through the scripts in reverse order.

A script is a vertical stack of command blocks. A command block may have
input slots, and each input slot may have a reporter block in it; the
reporter may itself have input slots that may have other reporters. You
can navigate through a script quickly by using the up arrow and down
arrow keys to move between command blocks. Once you find the command
block that you want to edit, the left and right arrow keys move between
editable items within that command. (Left and right arrow when there are
no more editable items within the current command block will move up or
down to another command block, respectively.) Here is a sequence of
pictures showing the results of repeated right arrow keys starting from
the position shown above:

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1096.png" style="width:702px; height:120px">
You can rearrange scripts within the
scripting area from the keyboard. Typing shift-arrow keys (left, right,
up, or down) will move the current script. If you move it onto another
script, the two won't snap together; the one you're moving will overlap
the one already there. This means that you can move across another
script to get to a free space.

### Editing a script

Note that the keyboard editor *focus,* the point shown as a white bar or
halo, is either *between* two command blocks or *on* an input slot. The
editing keys do somewhat different things in each of those two cases.

The backspace key deletes a block. If the focus is between two commands,
the one *before* (above) the blinking bar is deleted. If the focus is on
an input slot, the reporter in that slot is deleted. (If that input slot
has a default value, it will appear in the slot.) If the focus is on a
*variadic* input (one that can change the number of inputs by clicking
on arrowheads), then *one* input slot is deleted. (When you right-arrow
into a variadic input, the focus first covers the entire thing,
including the arrowheads; another right-arrow focuses on the first slot
within that input group. The focus is "on the variadic input" when it
covers the entire thing.)

The enter key does nothing if the focus is between commands, or on a
reporter. If the focus is on a variadic input, the enter key adds one
more input slot. If the focus is on a white input slot (one that doesn't
have a reporter in it), then the enter key selects that input slot for
*editing;* that is, you can type into it, just as if you'd clicked on
the input slot. (Of course, if the focus is on an input slot containing
a reporter, you can use the backspace key to delete that reporter, and
then use the enter key to type a value into it.) When you finish typing
the value, type the enter key again to accept it and return to
navigation, or the escape key if you decide not to change the value
already in the slot.

The space key is used to see a menu of possibilities for the input slot
in focus. It does nothing unless the focus is on a single input slot. If
the focus is on a slot with a pulldown menu of options, then the space
key shows that menu. (If it's a block-colored slot, meaning that only
the choices in the menu can be used, the enter key will do the same
thing. But if it's a white slot with a menu, such as in the turn blocks,
then enter lets you type a value, while space shows the menu.)
Otherwise, the space key shows a menu of variables available at this
point in the script. In either case, use the up and down arrow keys to
navigate the menu, use the enter key to accept the highlighted entry, or
use the escape key to leave the menu without choosing an option.

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1104.png" style="width:147px; height:163px">
Typing any other character key (not
special keys on fancy keyboards that do something other than generating
a character) activates the *block search palette.* This palette, which
is also accessible by typing control-F or command-F outside the keyboard
editor, or by clicking the search button floating at the top of the
palette, has a text entry field at the top, followed by blocks whose
title text includes what you type. The character key you typed to start
the block search palette is entered into the text field, so you start
with a palette of blocks containing that character. Within the palette,
blocks whose titles *start* with the text you type come first, then
blocks in which *a word* of the title starts with the text you type, and
finally blocks in which the text appears inside a word of the title.
Once you have typed enough text to see the block you want, use the arrow
keys to navigate to that block in the palette, then enter to insert that
block, or escape to leave the block search palette without inserting the
block. (When not in the keyboard editor, instead of navigating with the
arrow keys, you drag the block you want into the script, as you would
from any other palette.)

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1105.png" style="width:272px; height:81px">
If you type an arithmetic operator (+-\*/)
or comparison operator (\<=\>) into the block search text box, you can
type an arbitrarily complicated expression, and a collection of
arithmetic operator blocks will be constructed to match:

As the example shows, you can also use parentheses for grouping, and
non-numeric operands are treated as variables or primitive functions. (A
variable name entered in this way may or may not already exist in the
script. Only round and the ones in the pulldown menu of the sqrt block
can be used as function names.)

### Running the selected script

Type control-shift-enter to run the script with the editor focus, like
clicking the script.

