---
title: 42. Loading Saved Projects

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 24
parent: Saving and Loading Projects and Media

---

Loading Saved Projects
----------------------

Once you've saved a project, you want to be able to load it back into
Snap*!*. There are two ways to do this:

1\. If you saved the project in your online Snap*!* account, choose the
"Open..." option from the File menu. Choose the "Cloud" button, then
select your project from the list in the big text box and click OK, or
choose the "Computer" button to open an operating system open dialog. (A
third button, "Examples," lets you choose from example projects that we
provide. You can see what each of these projects is about by clicking on
it and reading its project notes.)

2\. If you saved the project as an XML file on your computer, choose
"Import..." from the File menu. This will give you an ordinary browser
file-open window, in which you can navigate to the file as you would in
other software. Alternatively, find the XML file on your desktop, and
just drag it onto the Snap*!* window.

The second technique above also allows you to import media (costumes and
sounds) into a project. Just choose "Import..." and then select a
picture or sound file instead of an XML file.

Snap*!* can also import projects created in BYOB 3.0 or 3.1, or (with
some effort; see our web site) in Scratch 1.4, 2.0 or 3.0. Almost all
such projects work correctly in Snap*!*, apart from a small number of
incompatible blocks.

If you saved projects in an earlier version of Snap*!* using the
"Browser" option, then a Browser button will be shown in the Open dialog
to allow you to retrieve those projects. But you can save them only with
the Computer and Cloud options.

