        ---
        title: 48. Simple Blocks

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 28
        parent: Building a Block

        ---

Simple Blocks
-------------

![](image495.png){width="7.5in"
height="2.7152777777777777in"}In every palette, at or near the bottom,
is a button labeled "Make a block." Also, floating near the top of the
palette is a plus sign. Also, the menu you get by right-clicking on the
background of the scripting area has a "make a block" option.

![](image501.png){width="2.2708333333333335in"
height="2.3472222222222223in"}Clicking any of these will display a
dialog window in which you choose the block's name, shape, and
palette/color. You also decide whether the block will be available to
all sprites, or only to the current sprite and its children.

In this dialog box, you can choose the block\'s palette, shape, and
name. With one exception, there is one color per palette, e.g., all
Motion blocks are blue. But the Variables palette includes the orange
variable-related blocks and the red list-related blocks. Both colors are
available, along with an "Other" option that makes grey blocks in the
Variables palette for blocks that don't fit any category.

There are three block shapes, following a convention that should be
familiar to Scratch users: The jigsaw-puzzle-piece shaped blocks are
Commands, and don't report a value. The oval blocks are Reporters, and
the hexagonal blocks are Predicates, which is the technical term for
reporters that report Boolean (true or false) values.

Suppose you want to make a block named "square" that draws a square. You
would choose Motion, Command, and type "square" into the name field.
When you click OK, you enter the Block Editor. This works just like
making a script in the sprite's scripting area, except that the "hat"
block at the top, instead of saying something like "when I am clicked,"
has a picture of the block you're building. This hat block is called the
*prototype* of your custom block.[^3] You drag blocks under the hat to
program your custom block, then click OK:

![](image502.png){width="4.210937226596675in"
height="1.3364041994750657in"}

![](image503.png){width="4.615555555555556in"
height="3.647777777777778in"}

Your block appears at the bottom of the Motion palette. Here's the block
and the result of using it:

![](image504.png){width="4.242361111111111in"
height="1.4166666666666667in"}

