        ---
        title: 54. Recursion

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 31
        parent: Building a Block

        ---

Recursion
---------

![](image514.png){width="2.9652777777777777in"
height="2.3631944444444444in"}![](image515.png){width="1.9583333333333333in"
height="2.3541666666666665in"}![](image516.png){width="1.4236111111111112in"
height="0.9118055555555555in"}Since the new custom block appears in its
palette as soon as you *start* editing it, you can write recursive
blocks (blocks that call themselves) by dragging the block into its own
definition:

(If you added inputs to the block since opening the editor, click Apply
before finding the block in the palette, or drag the block from the top
of the block editor rather than from the palette.)

If recursion is new to you, here are a few brief hints: It's crucial
that the recursion have a *base case,* that is, some small(est) case
that the block can handle without using recursion. In this example, it's
the case depth=0, for which the block does nothing at all, because of
the enclosing if. Without a base case, the recursion would run forever,
calling itself over and over.

Don't try to trace the exact sequence of steps that the computer follows
in a recursive program. Instead, imagine that inside the computer there
are many small people, and if Theresa is drawing a tree of size 100,
depth 6, she hires Tom to make a tree of size 70, depth 5, and later
hires Theo to make another tree of size 70, depth 5. Tom in turn hires
Tammy and Tallulah, and so on. Each little person has his or her own
local variables size and depth, each with different values.

![](image517.png){width="4.8380686789151355in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}You can also write recursive reporters,
like this block to compute the factorial function:

Note the use of the report block. When a reporter block uses this block,
the reporter finishes its work and reports the value given; any further
blocks in the script are not evaluated. Thus, the if else block in the
script above could have been just an if, with the second report block
below it instead of inside it, and the result would be the same, because
when the ﬁrst report is seen in the base case, that finishes the block
invocation, and the second report is ignored. There is also a stop this
block block that has a similar purpose, ending the block invocation
early, for command blocks. (By contrast, the stop this script block
stops not only the current block invocation, but also the entire
toplevel script that called it.)

![](image521.png){width="4.291666666666667in"
height="0.8645833333333334in"}Here's a slightly more compact way to
write the factorial function:

For more on recursion, see *Thinking Recursively* by Eric Roberts. (The
original edition is ISBN **978‑0471816522; a more recent *Thinking
Recursively in Java* is ISBN 978-0471701460.)**

