---
title: 58. Custom blocks and Visible Stepping

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 33
parent: Building a Block

---

Custom blocks and Visible Stepping
----------------------------------

Visible stepping normally treats a call to a custom block as a single
step. If you want to see stepping inside a custom block you must take
these steps *in order:*

1.  ![](image123.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
    height="0.16666666666666666in"}Turn on Visible Stepping.

2.  Select "Edit" in the context menu(s) of the block(s) you want to
    examine.

3.  Then start the program.

The Block Editor windows you open in step 2 do not have full editing
capability. You can tell because there is only one "OK" button at the
bottom, not the usual three buttons. Use the button to close these
windows when done stepping.

First class lists
=================

A data type is *ﬁrst class* in a programming language if data of that
type can be

-   the value of a variable

-   an input to a procedure

-   the value returned by a procedure

-   a member of a data aggregate

-   anonymous (not named)

In Scratch, numbers and text strings are ﬁrst class. You can put a
number in a variable, use one as the input to a block, call a reporter
that reports a number, or put a number into a list.

But Scratch's lists are not ﬁrst class. You create one using the "Make a
list" button, which requires that you give the list a name. You can't
put the list into a variable, into an input slot of a block, or into a
list item---you can't have lists of lists. None of the Scratch reporters
reports a list value. (You can use a reduction of the list into a text
string as input to other blocks, but this loses the list structure; the
input is just a text string, not a data aggregate.)

A fundamental design principle in Snap*!* is that ***[all data should be
ﬁrst class]{.underline}**.* If it's in the language, then we should be
able to use it fully and freely. We believe that this principle avoids
the need for many special-case tools, which can instead be written by
Snap*!* users themselves.

![](image523.png){width="2.839583333333333in"
height="0.41597222222222224in"}Note that it's a data *type* that's ﬁrst
class, not an individual value. Don't think, for example, that some
lists are ﬁrst class, while others aren't. In Snap*!*, lists are ﬁrst
class, period.

 The list Block
--------------

At the heart of providing first class lists is the ability to make an
"anonymous" list---to make a list without simultaneously giving it a
name. The list reporter block does that.

![](image524.png){width="4.2in"
height="1.5694444444444444in"}At the right end of the block are two
left-and-right arrowheads. Clicking on these changes the number of
inputs to list, i.e., the number of elements in the list you are
building. Shift-clicking changes by three at a time.

![](image534.png){width="1.5034722222222223in"
height="1.8125in"}![](image535.png){width="2.24375in"
height="0.3215277777777778in"}You can use this block as input to many
other blocks:

![](image536.png){width="3.09375in"
height="0.7708333333333334in"}![](image537.png){width="1.8229166666666667in"
height="0.2916666666666667in"}Snap*!* does not have a "Make a list"
button like the one in Scratch. If you want a global "named list," make
a global variable and use the set block to put a list into the variable.

