        ---
        title: 64. Higher Order List Operations and Rings

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 36
        parent: Building a Block

        ---

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image556.png" style="width:563px; height:103px">Higher Order List Operations and Rings
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There's an even easier way to select the even numbers from a list:

![](image557.png){width="2.375in"
height="0.2777777777777778in"}The keep block takes a Predicate
expression as its first input, and a list as its second input. It
reports a list containing those elements of the input list for which the
predicate returns true. Notice two things about the predicate input:
First, it has a grey ring around it. Second, the mod block has an empty
input. Keep puts each item of its input list, one at a time, into that
empty input before evaluating the predicate. (The empty input is
supposed to remind you of the "box" notation for variables in elementary
school: ☐+3=7.) The grey ring is part of the keep block as it appears in
the palette:

![](image558.png){width="4.1402777777777775in"
height="0.6354166666666666in"}What the ring means is that this input is
a block (a predicate block, in this case, because the interior of the
ring is a hexagon), rather than the value reported by that block. Here's
the difference:

Evaluating the = block without a ring reports true or false; evaluating
the block *with* a ring reports the block itself. This allows keep to
evaluate the = predicate repeatedly, once for each list item. A block
that takes another block as input is called a *higher order* block (or
higher order procedure, or higher order function).

![](image562.png){width="2.39in"
height="0.22in"}![](image563.png){width="1.6944444444444444in"
height="0.9930555555555556in"} Snap*!* provides four higher order
function blocks for operating on lists:

![](image571.png){width="7.5in"
height="1.7138888888888888in"}You've already seen keep. Find first is
similar, but it reports just the first item that satisfies the
predicate, not a list of all the matching items. It's equivalent to but
faster because it

stops looking as soon as it finds a match. If there are no matching
items, it returns an empty string.

![](image572.png){width="7.589583333333334in"
height="1.0791666666666666in"}

![](image574.png){width="7.486111111111111in"
height="1.0020833333333334in"}These examples use small lists, to fit the
page, but the higher order blocks work for any size list.

An *empty* gray ring represents the *identity function,* which just
reports its input. Leaving the ring in map empty is the most concise way
to make a shallow copy of a list (that is, in the case of a list of
lists, the result is a new toplevel list whose items are the same
(uncopied) lists that are items of the toplevel input list). To make a
deep copy of a list (that is, one in which all the sublists, sublists of
sublists, etc. are copied), use the list as input to the ![Macintosh
HD:Users:bh:Desktop:id.png](image576.png){width="0.7430555555555556in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"} block (one of the variants of the sqrt
of block). This works because id of is a hyperblock (page 55).

![](image313.png){width="5.5800503062117235in"
height="0.4623108048993876in"}The third higher order block, combine,
computes a single result from *all* the items of a list, using a
*two-input* reporter as its second input. In practice, there are only a
few blocks you'll ever use with combine:

These blocks take the sum of the list items, take their product, string
them into one word, combine them into a sentence (with spaces between
items), see if all items of a list of Booleans are true, see if any of
the items is true, find the smallest, or find the largest.

![](image585.png){width="6.279166666666667in"
height="0.37569444444444444in"}![](image586.png){width="3.8680555555555554in"
height="0.3451388888888889in"}Why + but not −? It only makes sense to
combine list items using an *associative* function: one that doesn't
care in what order the items are combined (left to right or right to
left). (2+3)+4 = 2+(3+4), but (2−3)−4 ≠ 2−(3−4).

![](image587.png){width="5.808333333333334in"
height="1.1909722222222223in"}The functions map, keep, and find first
have an advanced mode with rarely-used features: If their function input
is given explicit input names (by clicking the arrowhead at the right
end of the gray ring; see page 69), then it will be called for each list
item with *three* inputs: the item's value (as usual), the item's
position in the input list (its index), and the entire input list. No
more than three input names can be used in this contex

 {#section-2 .ListParagraph}

Table View vs. List View
------------------------

![](image588.png){width="3.0993055555555555in"
height="2.513888888888889in"}We mentioned earlier that there are two
ways of representing lists visually. For one-dimensional lists (lists
whose items are not themselves lists) the visual differences are small:

For one-dimensional lists, it's not really the appearance that's
important. What matters is that the *list view* allows very versatile
direct manipulation of the list through the picture: you can edit the
individual items, you can delete items by clicking the tiny buttons next
to each item, and you can add new items at the end by clicking the tiny
plus sign in the lower left corner. (You can just barely see that the
item deletion buttons have minus signs in them.) Even if you have
several watchers for the same list, all of them will be updated when you
change anything. On the other hand, this versatility comes at an
efficiency cost; a list view watcher for a long list would be way too
slow. As a partial workaround, the list view can only contain 100 items
at a time; the downward-pointing arrowhead opens a menu in which you can
choose which 100 to display.

![](image592.png){width="1.2555555555555555in"
height="0.9125in"}

By contrast, because it doesn't allow direct editing, the *table view*
watcher can hold hundreds of thousands of items and still scroll through
them efficiently. The table view has flatter graphics for the items to
remind you that they're not clickable to edit the values.

Right-clicking on a list watcher (in either form) gives you the option
to switch to the other form. The right-click menu also offers an open in
dialog... option that opens an *offstage* table view watcher, because
the watchers can take up a lot of stage space that may make it hard to
see what your program is actually doing. Once the offstage dialog box is
open, you can close the stage watcher. There's an OK button on the
offstage dialog to close it if you want. Or you can right-click it to
make *another* offstage watcher, which is useful if you want to watch
two parts of the list at once by having each watcher scrolled to a
different place.

![](image538.png){width="5.888888888888889in"
height="1.0486111111111112in"}Table view is the default if the list has
more than 100 items, or if any of the first ten items of the list are
lists, in which case it makes a very different-looking two-dimensional
picture:

In this format, the column of red items has been replaced by a
spreadsheet-looking display. For short, wide lists, this display makes
the content of the list very clear. A vertical display, with much of the
space taken up by the "machinery" at the bottom of each sublist, would
make it hard to show all the text at once. (The pedagogic cost is that
the structure is no longer explicit; we can't tell just by looking that
this is a list of row-lists, rather than a list of column-lists or a
primitive two-dimensional array type. But you can choose list view to
see the structure.)

Beyond such simple cases, in which every item of the main list is a list
of the same length, it's important to keep in mind that the design of
table view has to satisfy two goals, not always in agreement: (1) a
visually compelling display of two-dimensional arrays, and (2) highly
efficient display generation, so that Snap*!* can handle very large
lists, since "big data" is an important topic of study. To meet the
first goal perfectly in the case of "ragged right" arrays in which
sublists can have different lengths, Snap*!* would scan the entire list
to find the maximum width before displaying anything, but that would
violate the second goal.

Snap*!* uses the simplest possible compromise between the two goals: It
examines only the first ten items of the list to decide on the format.
If none of those are lists, or they're all lists of one item, and the
overall length is no more than 100, list view is used. If the any of
first ten items is a list, then table view is used, and the number of
columns in the table is equal to the largest number of items among the
first ten items (sublists) of the main list.

Table views open with standard values for the width and height of a
cell, regardless of the actual data. You can change these values by
dragging the column letters or row numbers. Each column has its own
width, but changing the height of a row changes the height for all rows.
(This distinction is based not on the semantics of rows vs. columns, but
on the fact that a constant row height makes scrolling through a large
list more efficient.) Shift-dragging a column label will change the
width of that column.

If you tried out the adjustments in the previous paragraph, you may have
noticed that a column letter turns into a number when you hover over it.
Labeling rows and columns differently makes cell references such as
"cell 4B" unambiguous; you don't have to have a convention about whether
to say the row first or the column first. ("Cell B4" is the same as
"cell 4B.") On the other hand, to extract a value from column B in your
program, you have to say item 2 of, not item B of. So it's useful to be
able to find out a column number by hovering over its letter.

![](image596.png){width="3.817361111111111in"
height="0.8111111111111111in"}Any value that can appear in a program can
be displayed in a table cell:

![](image597.png){width="4.336805555555555in"
height="2.104861111111111in"}This display shows that the standard cell
dimensions may not be enough for large value images. By expanding the
entire speech balloon and then the second column and all the rows, we
can make the result fit:

![](image601.png){width="3.3409722222222222in"
height="0.5770833333333333in"}But we make an exception for cases in
which the value in a cell is a list (so that the entire table is
three-dimensional). Because lists are visually very big, we don't try to
fit the entire value in a cell:

Even if you expand the size of the cells, Snap*!* will not display
sublists of sublists in table view. There are two ways to see these
inner sublists: You can switch to list view, or you can double-click on
a list icon in the table to open a dialog box showing just that
sub-sub-list in table view.

![](image602.png){width="3.3541666666666665in"
height="0.6944444444444444in"}One last detail: If the first item of a
list is a list (so table view is used), but a later item *isn't* a list,
that later item will be displayed on a red background, like an item of a
single-column list:

So, in particular, if only the first item is a list, the display will
look almost like a one-column display.

