---
title: Chapter 4. Typed Inputs

layout: home
has_children: true
has_toc: true
nav_order: 39
---

 Typed Inputs
============

 Scratch's Type Notation
-----------------------

![](image654.png){width="1.375in"
height="0.2125in"}Prior to version 3, Scratch block inputs came in two
types: Text-or-number type and Number type. The former is indicated by a
rectangular box, the latter by a rounded box: . A third Scratch type,
Boolean (true/false), can be used in certain Control blocks with
hexagonal slots.

The Snap*!* types are an expanded collection including Procedure, List,
and Object types. Note that, with the exception of Procedure types, all
of the input type shapes are just reminders to the user of what the
block expects; they are not enforced by the language.

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image655.png" style="width:248px; height:154px">The Snap*!* Input Type Dialog
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the Block Editor input name dialog, there is a right-facing arrowhead
after the "Input name" option:

Clicking that arrowhead opens the "long" input name dialog:

![](image657.png){width="5.170833333333333in"
height="4.135416666666667in"}![](image658.png){width="0.19791666666666666in"
height="0.19791666666666666in"}There are twelve input type shapes, plus
three mutually exclusive modifiers, listed in addition to the basic
choice between title text and an input name. The default type, the one
you get if you don't choose anything else, is "Any," meaning that this
input slot is meant to accept any value of any type. If the size input
in your block should be an oval-shaped numeric slot rather than a
generic rectangle, click "Number."

![](image659.png){width="6.822222222222222in"
height="2.7569444444444446in"}The arrangement of the input types is
systematic. As the pictures on this and the next page show, each row of
types is a category, and parts of each column form a category.
Understanding the arrangement will make it a little easier to find the
type you want.

![](image658.png){width="0.13194444444444445in"
height="0.13194444444444445in"}The second row of input types contains
the ones found in Scratch: Number, Any, and Boolean. (The reason these
are in the second row rather than the ﬁrst will become clear when we
look at the column arrangement.) The ﬁrst row contains the new Snap*!*
types other than procedures: Object, Text, and List. The last two rows
are the types related to procedures, discussed more fully below.

The List type is used for ﬁrst class lists, discussed in Chapter IV
above. The red rectangles inside the input slot are meant to resemble
the appearance of lists as Snap*!* displays them on the stage: each
element in a red rectangle.

The Object type is for sprites, costumes, sounds, and similar data
types.

The Text type is really just a variant form of the Any type, using a
shape that suggests a text input.[^5]

