---
title: Section 78. Editing Block Properties
layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 44
parent: Chapter 4. Building a Block
---

### Editing Block Properties

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image513.png" style="width:96px; height:73px">
What if you change your mind about a
block's color (palette) or shape (command, reporter, predicate)? If you
click in the hat block at the top that holds the prototype, but not in
the prototype itself, you'll see a window in which you can change the
color, and *sometimes* the shape, namely, if the block is not used in
any script, whether in a scripting area or in another custom block.
(This includes a one-block script consisting of a copy of the new block
pulled out of the palette into the scripting area, seeing which made you
realize it's the wrong category. Just delete that copy (drag it back to
the palette) and then change the category.)

If you right-click/control-click the hat block, you get this menu:

Script pic exports a picture of the script. (Many of the illustrations
in this manual were made that way.) Translations opens a window in which
you can specify how your block should be translated if the user chooses
a language other than the one in which you are programming. Block
variables lets you create a variant of script variables for this block:
A script variable is created when a block is called, and it disappears
when that call finishes. What if you want a variable that's local to
this block, as a script variable is, but doesn't disappear between
invocations? That's a block variable. If the definition of a block
includes a block variable, then every time that (custom) block is
dragged from the palette into a script, the block variable is created.
Every time *that copy* of the block is called, it uses the same block
variable, which preserves its value between calls. Other copies of the
block have their own block variables. The in palette checkbox determines
whether or not this block will be visible in the palette. It's normally
checked, but you may want to hide custom blocks if you're a curriculum
writer creating a Parsons problem. To unhide blocks, choose "Hide
blocks" from the File menu and uncheck the checkboxes. Edit does the
same thing as regular clicking, as described earlier.

