---
title: 76. Call and Run

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 44
parent: Procedures as Data

---

Call and Run
------------

![](image692.png){width="3.6729166666666666in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}In the for block example above, the input
named action has been declared as type "Command (C-shaped)"; that's why
the finished block is C-shaped. But how does the block actually tell
Snap*!* to carry out the commands inside the C-slot? Here is a simple
version of the block script:

This is simplified because it assumes, without checking, that the ending
value is greater than the starting value; if not, the block should
(depending on the designer's purposes) either not run at all, or change
the variable by −1 for each repetition instead of by 1.

![](image693.png){width="0.5in"
height="0.15625in"}The important part of this script is the run block
near the end. This is a Snap*!* built-in command block that takes a
Command-type value (a script) as its input, and carries out its
instructions. (In this example, the value of the input is the script
that the user puts in the C-slot of the my for block.) There is a
similar call reporter block for invoking a Reporter or Predicate block.
The call and run blocks are at the heart of Snap*!*'s ﬁrst class
procedure feature; they allow scripts and blocks to be used as data---in
this example, as an input to a block---and eventually carried out under
control of the user's program.

![](image694.png){width="7.065972222222222in"
height="1.65625in"}Here's another example, this time using a
Reporter-type input in a map block (see page 50):

Here we are calling the Reporter "multiply by 10" three times, once with
each item of the given list as its input, and collecting the results as
a list. (The reported list will always be the same length as the input
list.) Note that the multiplication block has two inputs, but here we
have specified a particular value for one of them (10), so the call
block knows to use the input value given to it just to fill the other
(empty) input slot in the multiplication block. In the my map
definition, the input function is declared to be type Reporter, and data
is of type List.

### Call/Run with inputs

![](image698.png){width="1.8125in"
height="0.20833333333333334in"}The call block (like the run block) has a
right arrowhead at the end; clicking on it adds the phrase "with inputs"
and then a slot into which an input can be inserted:

If the left arrowhead is used to remove the last input slot, the "with
inputs" disappears also. The right arrowhead can be clicked as many
times as needed for the number of inputs required by the reporter block
being called.

![](image699.png){width="2.7291666666666665in"
height="0.31805555555555554in"}If the number of inputs given to call
(not counting the Reporter-type input that comes first) is the same as
the number of empty input slots, then the empty slots are filled from
left to right with the given input values. If call is given exactly one
input, then *every* empty input slot of the called block is filled with
the same value:

If the number of inputs provided is neither one nor the number of empty
slots, then there is no automatic filling of empty slots. (Instead you
must use explicit parameters in the ring, as discussed in Section C
below.)

![](image700.png){width="6.990277777777778in"
height="0.6979166666666666in"}An even more important thing to notice
about these examples is the *ring* around the Reporter-type input slots
in call and map above. This notation indicates that *the block itself,*
not the number or other value that the block would report when called,
is the input. If you want to use a block itself in a non-Reporter-type
(e.g., Any-type) input slot, you can enclose it explicitly in a ring,
found at the top of the Operators palette.

As a shortcut, if you right-click or control-click on a block (such as
the + block in this example), one of the choices in the menu that
appears is "ringify" and/or "unringify." The ring indicating a
Reporter-type or Predicate-type input slot is essentially the same idea
for reporters as the C-shaped input slot with which you're already
familiar; with a C-shaped slot, it's *the script* you put in the slot
that becomes the input to the C-shaped block.

There are three ring shapes. All are oval on the outside, indicating
that the ring reports a value, the block or script inside it, but the
inside shapes are command, reporter, or predicate, indicating what kind
of block or script is expected. Sometimes you want to put something more
complicated than a single reporter inside a reporter ring; if so, you
can use a script, but the script must report a value, as in a custom
reporter definition.

