---
title: 80. Writing Higher Order Procedures

layout: home
has_children: false
has_toc: true
nav_order: 46
parent: Procedures as Data

---

Writing Higher Order Procedures
-------------------------------

A *higher order procedure* is one that takes another procedure as an
input, or that reports a procedure. In this document, the word
"procedure" encompasses scripts, individual blocks, and nested
reporters. (Unless specified otherwise, "reporter" includes predicates.
When the word is capitalized inside a sentence, it means specifically
oval-shaped blocks. So, "nested reporters" includes predicates, but "a
Reporter-type input" doesn't.)

Although an Any-type input slot (what you get if you use the small
input-name dialog box) will accept a procedure input, it doesn't
automatically ring the input as described above. So the declaration of
Procedure-type inputs makes the use of your custom higher order block
much more convenient.

![](image708.png){width="2.375in"
height="1.3541666666666667in"}Why would you want a block to take a
procedure as input? This is actually not an obscure thing to do; the
primitive conditional and looping blocks (the C-shaped ones in the
Control palette) take a script as input. Users just don't usually think
about it in those terms! We could write the repeat block as a custom
block this way, if Snap*!* didn't already have one:

The lambda (Î») next to action in the prototype indicates that this is a
C-shaped block, and that the script enclosed by the C when the block is
used is the input named action in the body of the script. The only way
to make sense of the variable action is to understand that its value is
a script.

![](image509.png){width="2.5833333333333335in"
height="1.6041666666666667in"}To declare an input to be Procedure-type,
open the input name dialog as usual, and click on the arrowhead:

Then, in the long dialog, choose the appropriate Procedure type. The
third row of input types has a ring in the shape of each block type
(jigsaw for Commands, oval for Reporters, and hexagonal for Predicates).
In practice, though, in the case of Commands it's more common to choose
the C-shaped slot on the fourth row, because this "container" for
command scripts is familiar to Scratch users. Technically the C-shaped
slot is an *unevaluated* procedure type, something discussed in Section
E below. The two Command-related input types (inline and C-shaped) are
connected by the fact that if a variable, an item (\#) of \[list\]
block, or a custom Reporter block is dropped onto a C-shaped slot of a
custom block, it turns into an inline slot, as in the repeater block's
recursive call above. (Other built-in Reporters can't report scripts, so
they aren't accepted in a C-shaped slot.)

![](image658.png){width="0.19791666666666666in"
height="0.19791666666666666in"}![](image709.png){width="3.6527777777777777in"
height="2.75455271216098in"}\
Why would you ever choose an inline Command slot rather than a C shape?
Other than the run block
![](image710.png){width="2.1145833333333335in"
height="0.46875in"}discussed below, the only case I can think of is
something like the C/C++/Java for loop, which actually has *three*
command script inputs (and one predicate input), only one of which is
the "featured" loop body:

Okay, now that we have procedures as inputs to our blocks, how do we use
them? We use the blocks run (for commands) and call (for reporters). The
run block's script input is an inline ring, not C-shaped, because we
anticipate that it will be rare to use a specific, literal script as the
input. Instead, the input will generally be a variable whose *value* is
a script.

The run and call blocks have arrowheads at the end that can be used to
open slots for inputs to the called procedures. How does Snap*!* know
where to use those inputs? If the called procedure (block or script) has
empty input slots, Snap*!* "does the right thing." This has several
possible meanings:

![](image711.png){width="3.4479166666666665in"
height="0.34405949256342955in"}1. If the number of empty slots is
exactly equal to the number of inputs provided, then Snap*!* fills the
empty slots from left to right:

2\. If exactly one input is provided, Snap*!* will fill any number of
empty slots with it:

![](image712.png){width="2.8020833333333335in"
height="0.30694444444444446in"}

3\. Otherwise, Snap*!* won't fill any slots, because the user's intention
is unclear.

If the user wants to override these rules, the solution is to use a ring
with explicit input names that can be put into the given block or script
to indicate how inputs are to be used. This will be discussed more fully
below.

