        ---
        title: 88. Special Forms in Scratch

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 51
        parent: Procedures as Data

        ---

### Special Forms in Scratch

Special forms are actually not a new invention in Snap*!*. Many of
Scratch's conditional and looping blocks are really special forms. The
hexagonal input slot in the if block is a straightforward Boolean value,
because the value can be computed once, before the if block makes its
decision about whether or not to run its action input. But the forever
if, repeat until, and wait until blocks' inputs can't be Booleans; they
have to be of type "Boolean (unevaluated)," so that Scratch can evaluate
them over and over again. Since Scratch doesn't have custom C‑shaped
blocks, it can afford to handwave away the distinction between evaluated
and unevaluated Booleans, but Snap*!* can't. The pedagogic value of
special forms is proven by the fact that no Scratcher ever notices that
there's anything strange about the way in which the hexagonal inputs in
the Control blocks are evaluated.

Also, the C-shaped slot familiar to Scratch users is an unevaluated
procedure type; you don't have to use a ring to keep the commands in the
C-slot from being run before the C-shaped block is run. Those commands
themselves, not the result of running them, are the input to the
C-shaped Control block. (This is taken for granted by Scratch users,
especially because Scratchers don't think of the contents of a C-slot as
an input at all.) This is why it makes sense that "C‑shaped" is on the
fourth row of types in the long form input dialog, with other
unevaluated types.

