        ---
        title: Chapter 7. Object Oriented Programming with Sprites

        layout: home
        has_children: true
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 52
        ---

 Object Oriented Programming with Sprites
=================

Object oriented programming is a style based around the abstraction
*object:* a collection of *data* and *methods* (procedures, which from
our point of view are just more data) that you interact with by sending
it a *message* (just a name, maybe in the form of a text string, and
perhaps additional inputs). The object responds to the message by
carrying out a method, which may or may not report a value back to the
asker. Some people emphasize the *data hiding* aspect of OOP (because
each object has local variables that other objects can access only by
sending request messages to the owning object) while others emphasize
the *simulation* aspect (in which each object abstractly represents
something in the world, and the interactions of objects in the program
model real interactions of real people or things). Data hiding is
important for large multi-programmer industrial projects, but for
Snap*!* users it's the simulation aspect that's important. Our approach
is therefore less restrictive than that of some other OOP languages; we
give objects easy access to each others' data and methods.

Technically, object oriented programming rests on three legs: (1)
*Message passing:* There is a notation by which any object can send a
message to another object. (2) *Local state:* Each object can remember
the important past history of the computation it has performed.
("Important" means that it need not remember every message it has
handled, but only the lasting effects of those messages that will affect
later computation.) (3) *Inheritance:* It would be impractical if each
individual object had to contain methods, many of them identical to
those of other objects, for all of the messages it can accept. Instead,
we need a way to say that this new object is just like that old object
except for a few differences, so that only those differences need be
programmed explicitly.

