        ---
        title: 16. Variables

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 10
        parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

        ---

###  Global Variables

You can create variables "by hand" that aren't limited to being used
within a single block. At the top of the Variables palette, click the
"Make a variable" button:

![](image96.png){width="3.1875in"
height="1.84375in"}![](image97.png){width="2.0520833333333335in"
height="2.2708333333333335in"}This will bring up a dialog window in
which you can give your variable a name:

The dialog also gives you a choice to make the variable available to all
sprites (which is almost always what you want) or to make it visible
only in the current sprite. You'd do that if you're going to give
several sprites individual variables *with the same name,* so that you
can share a script between sprites (by dragging it from the current
sprite's scripting area to the picture of another sprite in the sprite
corral), and the different sprites will do slightly different things
when running that script because each has a different value for that
variable name.

![](image98.png){width="1.6583333333333334in"
height="2.2916666666666665in"}If you give your variable the name "name"
then the Variables palette will look like this:

![](image99.png){width="1.0416666666666667in"
height="0.40625in"}There's now a "Delete a variable" button, and there's
an orange oval with the variable name in it, just like the orange oval
in the for block. You can drag the variable into any script in the
scripting area. Next to the oval is a checkbox, initially checked. When
it's checked, you'll also see a *variable watcher* on the stage:

When you give the variable a value, the orange box in its watcher will
display the value.

![](image100.png){width="1.9270833333333333in"
height="0.4791666666666667in"}How *do* you give it a value? You use the
set block:

Note that you *don't* drag the variable's oval into the set block! You
click on the downarrow in the first input slot, and you get a menu of
all the available variable names.

If you do choose "For this sprite only" when creating a variable, its
block in the palette looks like this:

![Macintosh
HD:Users:bh:Desktop:local-var.png](image101.png){width="0.6583333333333333in"
height="0.14166666666666666in"} The *location*-pin icon is a bit of a
pun on a sprite-*local* variable. It's shown only in the palette.

