        ---
        title: 4. Costumes and Sounds

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 4
        parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

        ---

### Costumes and Sounds

![](image30.png){width="0.3194444444444444in"
height="0.2152777777777778in"}![](image31.png){width="1.7666666666666666in"
height="1.875in"}![](image32.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}To change the appearance of a sprite,
paint or import a new *costume* for it. To paint a costume, click on the
Costumes tab above the scripting area, and click the paint button . The
*Paint Editor* that appears is explained on page 128. There are three
ways to import a costume. First select the desired sprite in the sprite
corral. Then, one way is to click on the file icon in the tool bar ,
then choose the "Costumes..."menu item. You will see a list of costumes
from the public media library, and can choose one. The second way, for a
costume stored on your own computer, is to click on the file icon and
choose the "Import..." menu item. You can then select a file in any
picture format (PNG, JPEG, etc.) supported by your browser. The third
way is quicker if the file you want is visible on the desktop: Just drag
the file onto the Snap*!* window. In any of these cases, the scripting
area will be replaced by something like this:

Just above this part of the window is a set of three tabs: Scripts,
Costumes, and Sounds. You'll see that the Costumes tab is now selected.
In this view, the sprite's *wardrobe,* you can choose whether the sprite
should wear its Turtle costume or its Alonzo costume. (Alonzo, the
Snap*!* mascot, is named after Alonzo Church, a mathematician who
invented the idea of procedures as data, the most important way in which
Snap*!* is different from Scratch.) You can give a sprite as many
costumes as you like, and then choose which it will wear either by
clicking in its wardrobe or by using the or block in a script. (Every
costume has a number as well as a name. The next costume block selects
the next costume by number; after the highest-numbered costume it
switches to costume 1. The Turtle, costume 0, is never chosen by next
costume.) The Turtle costume is the only one that changes color to match
a change in the sprite's pen color. Protip: switches to the *previous*
costume, wrapping like next costume.

![](image33.png){width="1.8055555555555556in"
height="0.2777777777777778in"}![](image34.png){width="2.9493055555555556in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}![](image38.png){width="1.8958333333333333in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}![](image39.png){width="1.2395833333333333in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}In addition to its costumes, a sprite can
have *sounds;* the equivalent for sounds of the sprite's wardrobe is
called its *jukebox.* Sound files can be imported in any format (WAV,
OGG, MP3, etc.) supported by your browser. *Two blocks accomplish the
task of playing sounds. If you would like a script to continue running
while the sound is playing, use the block . In contrast, you can use the
block to wait for the sound\'s completion before continuing the rest of
the script.*

