        ---
        title: 30. Visible stepping

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 17
        parent: Blocks, Scripts, and Sprites

        ---

### Visible stepping

![](image121.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}![](image122.png){width="0.5456342957130359in"
height="0.1527777777777778in"}![](image123.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}Sometimes you're not exactly sure where
the error is, or you don't understand how the program got there. To
understand better, you'd like to watch the program as it runs, at human
speed rather than at computer speed. You can do this by clicking the
*visible stepping button* ( ), before running a script or while the
script is paused. The button will light up ( ) and a speed control
slider will appear in the toolbar. When you start or continue the
script, its blocks and input slots will light up cyan one at a time:

![](image124.png){width="7.498611111111111in"
height="1.15in"}In this simple example, the inputs to the blocks are
constant values, but if an input were a more complicated expression
involving several reporter blocks, each of those would light up as they
are called. Note that the input to a block is evaluated before the block
itself is called, so, for example, the 100 lights up before the move.

![](image134.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}The speed of stepping is controlled by
the slider. If you move the slider all the way to the left, the speed is
zero, the pause button turns into a step button , and the script takes a
single step each time you push it. The name for this is *single
stepping.*

If several scripts that are visible in the scripting area are running at
the same time, all of them are stepped in parallel. However, consider
the case of two repeat loops with different numbers of blocks. While not
stepping, each script goes through a complete cycle of its loop in each
display cycle, despite the difference in the length of a cycle. In order
to ensure that the visible result of a program on the stage is the same
when stepped as when not stepped, the shorter script will wait at the
bottom of its loop for the longer script to catch up.

When we talk about custom blocks in Chapter III, we'll have more to say
about visible stepping as it affects those blocks.

