        ---
        title: 146. Introduction to Color

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 85
        parent: User Interface Elements

        ---

### Introduction to Color

![](image1131.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1132.png){width="0.4444444444444444in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1132.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}Your computer monitor can display millions
of colors, but you probably can't distinguish that many. For example,
here's red 57, green 180, blue 200: And here's red 57, green *182,* blue
200: You might be able to tell them apart if you see them side by side:
... but maybe not even then.

Color space---the collection of all possible colors---is
three-dimensional, but there are many ways to choose the dimensions. RGB
(red-green-blue), the one most commonly used in computers, matches the
way TVs and displays produce color. Behind every dot on the screen are
three tiny lights: a red one, a green one, and a blue one. But if you
want to print colors on paper, your printer probably uses a different
set of three colors: CMY (cyan-magenta-yellow). You may have seen the
abbreviation CMYK, which represents the common technique of adding black
ink to the collection. (Mixing cyan, magenta, and yellow in equal
amounts is supposed to result in black ink, but typically it comes out a
muddy brown instead, because chemistry.) Other systems that try to mimic
human perception are HSL (hue-saturation-lightness) and HSV
(hue-saturation-value). There are many, many more, each designed for a
particular purpose.

If you are a color professional---a printer, a web designer, a graphic
designer, an artist---then you need to understand all this. It can also
be interesting to learn about. For example, there are colors that you
can see but your computer display can't generate. If that intrigues you,
look up [color theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_theory) in
Wikipedia.

