        ---
        title: 114. The Settings Menu

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 69
        parent: User Interface Elements

        ---

###  The Settings Menu

![](image1003.png){width="1.2479166666666666in"
height="2.5833333333333335in"}![](image1004.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}The settings icon shows a menu of Snap*!*
options, either for the current project or for you permanently,
depending on the option:

The Language... option lets you see the Snap*!* user interface (blocks
and messages) in a language other than English. (Note: Translations have
been provided by Snap*!* users. If your native language is missing, send
us an email!)

The Zoom blocks\... option lets you change the size of blocks, both in
the palettes and in scripts. The standard size is 1.0 units. The main
purpose of this option is to let you take very high-resolution pictures
of scripts for use on posters. It can also be used to improve
readability when projecting onto a screen while lecturing, but bear in
mind that it doesn't make the palette or script areas any wider, so your
computer's command-option-+ feature may be more practical. Note that a
zoom of 2 is gigantic! Don't even try 10.

The Fade blocks... option opens a dialog in which you can change the
appearance of blocks:

![](image1005.png){width="7.4847222222222225in"
height="2.577777777777778in"}Mostly this is a propaganda aid to use on
people who think that text languages are somehow better or more grown up
than block languages, but some people do prefer less saturated block
colors. You can use the pulldown menu for preselected fadings, use the
slider to see the result as you change the fading amount, or type a
number into the text box once you've determined your favorite value.

The Stage size... option lets you set the size of the *full-size* stage
in pixels. If the stage is in half-size or double-size (presentation
mode), the stage size values don't change; they always reflect the
full-size stage.

The Microphone resolution... option sets the buffer size used by the
microphone block in Settings. "Resolution" is an accurate name if you
are getting frequency domain samples; the more samples, the narrower the
range of frequencies in each sample. In the time domain, the buffer size
determines the length of time over which samples are collected.

The remaining options let you turn various features on and off. There
are three groups of checkboxes. The first is for temporary settings not
saved in your project nor in your user preferences.

The JavaScript extensions option enables the use of the JavaScript
function block. Because malicious projects could use JavaScript to
collect private information about you, or to delete or modify your saved
projects, you must enable JavaScript *each time* you load a project that
uses it.

![](image1015.png){width="1.1895833333333334in"
height="0.18958333333333333in"}![](image1016.png){width="1.229861111111111in"
height="0.25972222222222224in"}The Extension blocks option adds two
blocks to the palette:

These blocks provide assorted capabilities to official libraries that
were formerly implemented with the JavaScript function block. This
allows these libraries to run without requiring the JavaScript
extensions option. Details are subject to change.

![](image1017.png){width="1.104861111111111in"
height="2.0833333333333335in"}![](image1018.png){width="1.6388888888888888in"
height="0.4131944444444444in"}Input sliders provides an alternate way to
put values in numeric input slots; if you click in such a slot, a slider
appears that you can control with the mouse:

The range of the slider will be from 25 less than the input's current
value to 25 more than the current value. If you want to make a bigger
change than that, you can slide the slider all the way to either end,
then click on the input slot again, getting a new slider with a new
center point. But you won't want to use this technique to change the
input value from 10 to 1000, and it doesn't work at all for non-integer
input ranges. This feature was implemented because software keyboard
input on phones and tablets didn't work at all in the beginning, and
still doesn't work perfectly on Android devices, so sliders provide a
workaround. It has since found another use in providing "lively"
response to input changes; if Input sliders is checked, reopening the
settings menu will show an additional option called Execute on slider
change. If this option is also checked, then changing a slider in the
scripting area automatically runs the script in which that input
appears. The project live-tree in the Examples collection shows how this
can be used; it features a fractal tree custom block with several
inputs, and you can see how each input affects the picture by moving a
slider.

Turbo mode makes many projects run much faster, at the cost of not
keeping the stage display up to date. (Snap*!* ordinarily spends most of
its time drawing sprites and updating variable watchers, rather than
actually carrying out the instructions in your scripts.) So turbo mode
isn't a good idea for a project with glide blocks or one in which the
user interacts with animated characters, but it's great for drawing a
complicated fractal, or computing the first million digits of ùúã, so that
you don't need to see anything until the final result. While in turbo
mode, the button that normally shows a green flag instead shows a green
lightning bolt. (But when ‚öë clicked hat blocks still activate when the
button is clicked.)

Visible stepping enables the slowed-down script evaluation described in
Chapter I. Checking this option is equivalent to clicking the footprint
button above the scripting area. You don't want this on except when
you're actively debugging, because even the fastest setting of the
slider is still slowed a lot.

Log pen vectors tells Snap*!* to remember lines drawn by sprites as
exact vectors, rather than remember only the pixels that the drawing
leaves on the stage. This remembered vector picture can be used in two
ways: First, right-clicking on a pen trails block gives an option to
relabel it into a pen vectors block which, when run, reports the logged
lines as a vector (svg) costume. Second, right-clicking on the stage
when there are logged vectors shows an extra option, svg..., that
exports a picture of the stage in vector format. Only lines are logged,
not color regions made with the fill block.

The next group of four are user preference options, preserved when you
load a new project. Long form input dialog, if checked, means that
whenever a custom block input name is created or edited, you immediately
see the version of the input name dialog that includes the type options,
default value setting, etc., instead of the short form with just the
name and the choice between input name and title text. The default
(unchecked) setting is definitely best for beginners, but more
experienced Snap*!* programmers may find it more convenient always to
see the long form.

Plain prototype labels eliminates the plus signs between words in the
Block Editor prototype block. This makes it harder to add an input to a
custom block; you have to hover the mouse where the plus sign would have
been, until a single plus sign appears temporarily for you to click on.
It's intended for people making pictures of scripts in the block editor
for use in documentation, such as this manual. You probably won't need
it otherwise.

Clicking sound causes a really annoying sound effect whenever one block
snaps next to another in a script. Certain very young children, and our
colleague Dan Garcia, like this, but if you are such a child you should
bear in mind that driving your parents or teachers crazy will result in
you not being allowed to use Snap*!*. It might, however, be useful for
visually impaired users.

Flat design changes the "skin" of the Snap*!* window to a really hideous
design with white and pale-grey background, rectangular rather than
rounded buttons, and monochrome blocks (rather than the shaded, somewhat
3D-looking normal blocks). The monochrome blocks are the reason for the
"flat" in the name of this option. The only thing to be said for this
option is that, because of the white background, it may blend in better
with the rest of a web page when a Snap*!* project is run in a frame in
a larger page. (I confess I used it to make the picture of blocks faded
all the way to just text two pages ago, though.)

The final group of settings change the way Snap*!* interprets your
program; they are saved with the project, so anyone who runs your
project will experience the same behavior. Thread safe scripts changes
the way Snap*!* responds when an event (clicking the green flag, say)
starts a script, and then, while the script is still running, the same
event happens again. Ordinarily, the running process stops where it is,
ignoring the remaining commands in the script, and the entire script
starts again from the top. This behavior is inherited from Scratch, and
some converted Scratch projects depend on it; that's why it's the
default. It's also sometimes the right thing, especially in projects
that play music in response to mouse clicks or keystrokes. If a note is
still playing but you ask for another one, you want the new one to start
right then, not later after the old process finishes. But if your script
makes several changes to a database and is interrupted in the middle,
the result may be that the database is inconsistent. When you select
Thread safe scripts, the same event happening again in the middle of
running a script is simply ignored. (This is arguably still not the
right thing; the event should be remembered and the script run again as
soon as it finishes. We'll probably get around to adding that choice
eventually.) Keyboard events (when \_\_ key pressed) are always
thread-safe.

Flat line ends affects the drawing of thick lines (large pen width).
Usually the ends are rounded, which looks best when turning corners.
With this option selected, the ends are flat. It's useful for drawing a
brick wall or a filled rectangle.

Codification support enables a feature that can translate a Snap*!*
project to a text-based (rather than block-based) programming language.
The feature doesn't know about any particular other language; instead,
you can provide a translation for each primitive block using these
special blocks:

![](image1019.png){width="3.120644138232721in"
height="0.5451388888888888in"}

Using these primitive blocks, you can build a block library to translate
into any programming language. Watch for such libraries to be added to
our library collection (or contribute one). To see some examples, open
the project "Codification" in the Examples project list. Edit the blocks
map to Smalltalk, map to JavaScript, etc., to see examples of how to
provide translations for blocks.

![](image1021.png){width="2.209722222222222in"
height="4.969444444444444in"}![](image1022.png){width="1.38in"
height="4.79in"}The Single palette option puts all blocks, regardless of
category, into a single palette. It's intended mainly for use by
curriculum developers building *Parsons problems:* projects in which
only a small set of blocks are provided, and the task is to arrange
those blocks to achieve a set goal. In that application, this option is
combined with the hiding of almost all primitive blocks. (See page 119.)
When Single palette is turned on, two additional options (initially on)
appear in the settings menu; the Show categories option controls the
appearance of the palette category names such as
<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1023.png" style="width:35px; height:15px">
and ![A picture containing logo Description automatically
generated](image1024.png){width="0.33in"
height="0.18in"}, while the Show buttons option controls the appearance
of the ![](image1025.png){width="0.61in"
height="0.16in"} and
<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1026.png" style="width:51px; height:15px">
buttons in the palette.

The HSL pen color model option changes the set pen, change pen, and pen
blocks to provide menu options hue, saturation, and lightness instead of
hue, saturation, and brightness (a/k/a value). Note: the name
"saturation" means something different in HSL from in HSV! See Appendix
A for all the information you need about colors.

The Disable click-to-run option tells Snap*!* to ignore user mouse
clicks on blocks and scripts if it would ordinarily run the block or
script. (Right-clicking and dragging still work, and so does clicking in
an input slot to edit it.) This is another Parsons problem feature; the
idea is that there will be buttons displayed that run code only in
teacher-approved ways. But kids can uncheck the checkbox. ‚ò∫Ô∏é

### Visible Stepping Controls

![](image121.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}After the menu buttons you'll see the
project name. After that comes the footprint button used to turn on
visible stepping and, when it's on, the slider to control the speed of
stepping.

