        ---
        title: 148. Crayons and Color Numbers

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 86
        parent: User Interface Elements

        ---

### Crayons and Color Numbers

![](image1135.png){width="5.995833333333334in"
height="0.825in"}But if you just want some colors in your project, we
provide a simple, one-dimensional subset of the available colors. Two
subsets, actually: *crayons* and *color numbers.* Here's the difference:

![](image1138.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1139.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1140.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}The first row shows 100 distinct colors.
They have names; this is pumpkin, and this is denim. You're supposed to
think of them as a big box of 100 crayons. They're arranged in families:
grays, pinks, reds, browns, oranges, etc. But they're not consistently
ordered within a family; you'd be unlikely to say "next crayon" in a
project. (But look at the crayon spiral on page 145.) Instead, you'd
think "I want this to look like a really old-fashioned photo" and so
you'd find sepia as crayon number 33. You don't have to memorize the
numbers! You can find them in a menu with a submenu for each family.

![](image1141.png){width="2.1597222222222223in"
height="0.2569444444444444in"}![](image1142.png){width="7.55in"
height="2.1527777777777777in"}Or, if you know the crayon name, just .

![](image1148.png){width="5.793055555555555in"
height="0.3in"}The crayon numbers are chosen so that skipping by 10
gives a sensible box of ten crayons:

Alternatively, skipping by 5 gives a still-sensible set of twenty
crayons:

<img src="/snap-manual/assets/images/image1149.png" style="width:557px; height:29px">

![](image1150.png){width="6.245138888888889in"
height="0.25625in"}The set of *color numbers* is arranged so that each
color number is visually near each of its neighbors. Bright and dark
colors alternate for each family. Color numbers range from 0 to 99, like
crayon numbers, but you can use fractional numbers to get as tiny a step
as you like:

("As tiny as you like" isn't *quite* true because in the end, your color
has to be rounded to integer RGB values for display.)

Both of these scales include the range of shades of gray, from black to
white. Since black is the initial pen color, and black isn't a hue,
Scratch and Snap*!* users would traditionally try to use set color to
escape from black, and it wouldn't work. By including black in the same
scale as other colors, we eliminate the Black Hole problem if people use
only the recommended color scales.

We are making a point of saying "color number" for what was sometimes
called just "color" in earlier versions of the library, because we now
reserve the name "color" for an actual color, an instance of the color
data type.\
**How to Use the Library**

There are three library blocks specifically about controlling the pen.
They have the same names as three of the primitive Pen blocks:

![](image401.png){width="6.066666666666666in"
height="0.30833333333333335in"}

![](image1156.png){width="7.4875in"
height="1.1in"}The first (Pen block-colored) input slot is used to
select which color scale you want to use. (These blocks also allow
reading or setting two block properties that are not colors: the pen
size and its transparency.) The pen reporter requires no other inputs;
it reports the state of the pen in whatever dimension you choose.

As the last example shows, you can't ask for the pen color in a scale
incompatible with how you set it, unless the block can deduce what you
want from what it knows about the current pen color.

The change pen block applies only to numeric scales (including vectors
of three or four numbers). It adds its numeric or list input to the
current pen value(s), doing vector (item-by-item) addition for vector
scales.

![](image1162.png){width="7.491666666666666in"
height="1.1069444444444445in"}The set pen block changes the pen color to
the value(s) you specify. The meaning of the white input slots depends
on which attribute of the pen you're setting:

In the last example, the number 37 sets the *transparency,* on the scale
0=opaque, 100=invisible. (All color attributes are on a 0--100 scale
except for RGB components, which are 0--255.) A transparency value can
be combined with any of these attribute scales.

![](image414.png){width="5.383333333333334in"
height="0.23333333333333334in"}The library also includes two
constructors and a selector for colors as a data type:

![](image402.png){width="1.8055555555555556in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}The latter two are inverses of each
other, translating between colors and their attributes. The color from
block's attribute menu has fewer choices than the similar set pen block
because you can, for example, set the Red value of the existing pen
color leaving the rest unchanged, but when creating a color out of
nothing you have to provide its entire specification, e.g., all of Red,
Green, and Blue, or the equivalent in other scales. (As you'll see on
the next page, we provide two *linear* (one-dimensional) color scales
that allow you to specify a color with a single number, at the cost of
including only a small subset of the millions of colors your computer
can generate.) If you have a color and want another color that's the
same except for one number, as in the Red example, you can use this
block:

Finally, the library includes the mix block and a helper:

![](image1181.png){width="6.113194444444445in"
height="0.23333333333333334in"}We'll have more to say about these after
a detour through color theory.

That's all you have to know about colors! *Crayons* for specific
interesting ones, *color numbers* for gradual transformation from one
color to the next. But there's a bit more to say, if you're interested.
If not, stop here. (But look at the samples of the different scales on
page 145.)\
**More about Colors: Fair Hues and Shades**

Several of the three-dimensional arrangements of colors use the concept
of "hue," which more or less means where a color would appear in a
rainbow (magenta, near the right, is [a long
story](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magenta)):

![](image1183.png){width="5.806666666666667in"
height="0.30666666666666664in"}

These are called "spectral" colors, after the *spectrum* of rainbow
colors. But these colors aren't equally distributed. There's an awful
lot of green, hardly any yellow, and just a sliver of orange. And no
brown at all.

And this is already a handwave, because the range of colors that can be
generated by RGB monitors doesn't include some of the *true* spectral
colors. See [Spectral
color](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectral_color) in Wikipedia for
all the gory details.

This isn't a problem with the physics of rainbows. It's in the human eye
and the human brain that certain ranges of wavelength of light waves are
lumped together as named colors. The eye is just "tuned" to recognize a
wide range of colors as green. (See [Rods and
Cones](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rods_and_cones).) And
different human cultures give names to different color ranges.
Nevertheless, in old Scratch projects, you'd say change pen color by 1
and it'd take forever to reach a color that wasn't green.

![](image1184.png){width="5.9944444444444445in"
height="0.29930555555555555in"}For color professionals, there are good
reasons to want to work with the physical rainbow hue layout. But for
amateurs using a simplified, one-dimensional color model, there's no
reason not to use a more programmer-friendly hue scale:

![](image1185.png){width="1.4597222222222221in"
height="1.3583333333333334in"}In this scale, each of the seven rainbow
colors and brown get an equal share. (Red's looks too small, but that's
because it's split between the two ends: hue 0 is pure red, brownish
reds are to its right, and purplish reds are wrapped around to the right
end.) We call this scale "fair hue" because each color family gets a
fair share of the total hue range. (By the way, you were probably taught
"... green, blue, indigo, violet" in school, but it turns out that color
names were different in Isaac Newton's day, and the color he called
"blue" is more like modern cyan, while his "indigo" is more like modern
blue. See Wikipedia [Indigo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indigo).)

![](image1186.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1187.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1188.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](image1189.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}Our *color number* scale is based on fair
hues, adding a range of grays from black (color number 0) to white
(color number14) and also adding *shades* of the spectral colors. (In
color terminology, a *shade* is a darker version of a color; a lighter
version is called a *tint.*) Why do we add shades but not tints? Partly
because I find shades more exciting. A shade of red can be dark candy
apple red or maroon , but a tint is just some kind of pink . This
admitted prejudice is supported by an objective fact: Most projects are
made on a white background, so dark colors stand out better than light
ones.

![](image1190.png){width="5.999305555555556in"
height="1.507638888888889in"}So, in our color number scale, color
numbers 0 to 14 are kinds of gray; the remaining color numbers go
through the fair hues, but alternating full-strength colors with shades.

This chart shows how the color scales discussed so far are related. Note
that all scales range from 0 to 100; the fair hues scale has been
compressed in the chart so that similar colors line up vertically. (Its
dimensions are different because it doesn't include the grays at the
left. Since there are eight color families, the pure, named fair hues
are at multiples of 100/8=12.5, starting with red=0.)

![](image1192.png){width="1.85in"
height="1.0798611111111112in"}White is crayon 14 and color number 14.
This value was deliberately chosen *not* to be a multiple of 5 so that
the every-fifth-crayon and every-tenth-crayon selections don't include
it, so that all of the crayons in those smaller boxes are visible
against a white stage background.

Among purples, the official spectral violet (crayon 90) is the end of
the spectrum. Magenta, brighter than violet, isn't a spectral color at
all. (In the picture at the left, the top part is the spectrum of white
light spread out through a prism; the middle part is a photograph of a
rainbow, and the bottom part is a digital simulation of a rainbow.)
Magenta is a mixture of red and blue. (attribution: Wikipedia user
Andys. CC BY-SA.)

The light gray at color number 10 is slightly different from crayon 10
just because of roundoff in computing crayon values. Color number 90 is
different from crayon 90 because the official RGB violet (equal parts
red and blue) is actually lighter than spectral violet. The purple
family is also unusual because magenta, crayon and color number 95, is
lighter than the violet at 90. In other families, the color numbers,
crayons, and (scaled) fair hues all agree at multiples of ten. These
multiple-of-ten positions are the standard RGB primary and secondary
colors, e.g., the yellow at color number 50 is (255, 255, 0) in RGB.
(Gray, brown, and orange don't have such simple RGB settings.)

The color numbers at odd multiples of five are generally darker shades
than the corresponding crayons. The latter are often official named
shades, e.g., teal, crayon 65, is a half-intensity shade of cyan. The
odd-five *color numbers,* though, are often darker, since they are
chosen to be the darkest color in a given family that's visibly
different from black. The pink at color number 15, though, is quite
different from crayon 15, because the former is a pure tint of red,
whereas the crayon, to get a more interesting pink, has a little magenta
mixed in. Color numbers at multiples of five are looked up in a table;
other color values are determined by linear interpolation in RGB space.
(*Crayons* are of course all found by table lookup.)

The from color block behaves specially when you ask for the *color
number* of a color. Most colors don't exactly match a color number, and
for other attributes of a color (crayon number, X11 name) you don't get
an answer unless the color exactly matches one of the names or numbers
in that attribute. But for color number, the block tries to find the
*nearest color number* to the color you specify. The result will be only
approximate; you can't use the number you get to recreate the input
color. But you can start choosing nearby color numbers as you animate
the sprite.

