        ---
        title: 84. Formal Parameters

        layout: home
        has_children: false
        has_toc: true
        nav_order: 48
        parent: Procedures as Data

        ---

Formal Parameters
-----------------

![](image723.png){width="3.5208333333333335in"
height="1.0395833333333333in"}The rings around Procedure-type inputs
have an arrowhead at the right. Clicking the arrowhead allows you to
give the inputs to a block or script explicit names, instead of using
empty input slots as we've done until now.

The names \#1, \#2, etc. are provided by default, but you can change a
name by clicking on its orange oval in the input names list. Be careful
not to *drag* the oval when clicking; that's how you use the input
inside the ring. The names of the input variables are called the *formal
parameters* of the encapsulated procedure.

![](image731.png){width="4.322916666666667in"
height="0.45416666666666666in"}Here's a simple but contrived example
using explicit names to control which input goes where inside the ring:

Here we just want to put one of the inputs into two different slots. If
we left all three slots empty, Snap*!* would not fill any of them,
because the number of inputs provided (2) would not match the number of
empty slots (3).

![](image732.png){width="4.679861111111111in"
height="3.0180555555555557in"}Here is a more realistic, much more
advanced example:

![](image733.png){width="4.347222222222222in"
height="1.4027777777777777in"}

This is the definition of a block that takes any number of lists, and
reports the list of all possible combinations of one item from each
list. The important part for this discussion is that near the bottom
there are two *nested* calls to map, the higher order function that
applies an input function to each item of an input list. In the inner
block, the function being mapped is in front of, and that block takes
two inputs. The second, the empty List-type slot, will get its value in
each call from an item of the inner map's list input. But there is no
way for the outer map to communicate values to empty slots of the in
front of block. We must give an explicit name, newitem, to the value
that the outer map is giving to the inner one, then drag that variable
into the in front of block.

By the way, once the called block provides names for its inputs, Snap*!*
will not automatically fill empty slots, on the theory that the user has
taken control. In fact, that's another reason you might want to name the
inputs explicitly: to stop Snap*!* from filling a slot that should
really remain empty.

