                ---
                title: 10. Chapter 10:  Appendix A. Snap*!* color library {#appendix-a.-snap-color-library .ListParagraph}

                layout: home
                has_children: true
                has_toc: false
                nav_order: 11
                ---


![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1123.png){width="5.8in"
height="2.1791666666666667in"}The Colors and Crayons library provides
several tools for manipulating color. Although its main purpose is
controlling a sprite's pen color, it also establishes colors as a first
class data type:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1129.png){width="3.1333333333333333in"
height="0.5166666666666667in"}For people who just want colors in their
projects without having to be color experts, we provide two simple
mechanisms: a *color number* scale with a broad range of continuous
color variation and a set of 100 *crayons* organized by color family
(ten reds, ten oranges, etc.) The crayons include the block colors:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1130.png){width="7.166666666666667in"
height="1.1in"}For experts, we provide color selection by RGB, HSL, HSV,
X11/W3C names, and variants on those scales.

### Introduction to Color

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1131.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1132.png){width="0.4444444444444444in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1132.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}Your computer monitor can display millions
of colors, but you probably can't distinguish that many. For example,
here's red 57, green 180, blue 200: And here's red 57, green *182,* blue
200: You might be able to tell them apart if you see them side by side:
... but maybe not even then.

Color space---the collection of all possible colors---is
three-dimensional, but there are many ways to choose the dimensions. RGB
(red-green-blue), the one most commonly used in computers, matches the
way TVs and displays produce color. Behind every dot on the screen are
three tiny lights: a red one, a green one, and a blue one. But if you
want to print colors on paper, your printer probably uses a different
set of three colors: CMY (cyan-magenta-yellow). You may have seen the
abbreviation CMYK, which represents the common technique of adding black
ink to the collection. (Mixing cyan, magenta, and yellow in equal
amounts is supposed to result in black ink, but typically it comes out a
muddy brown instead, because chemistry.) Other systems that try to mimic
human perception are HSL (hue-saturation-lightness) and HSV
(hue-saturation-value). There are many, many more, each designed for a
particular purpose.

If you are a color professional---a printer, a web designer, a graphic
designer, an artist---then you need to understand all this. It can also
be interesting to learn about. For example, there are colors that you
can see but your computer display can't generate. If that intrigues you,
look up [color theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_theory) in
Wikipedia.

### Crayons and Color Numbers

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1135.png){width="5.995833333333334in"
height="0.825in"}But if you just want some colors in your project, we
provide a simple, one-dimensional subset of the available colors. Two
subsets, actually: *crayons* and *color numbers.* Here's the difference:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1138.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1139.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1140.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}The first row shows 100 distinct colors.
They have names; this is pumpkin, and this is denim. You're supposed to
think of them as a big box of 100 crayons. They're arranged in families:
grays, pinks, reds, browns, oranges, etc. But they're not consistently
ordered within a family; you'd be unlikely to say "next crayon" in a
project. (But look at the crayon spiral on page 145.) Instead, you'd
think "I want this to look like a really old-fashioned photo" and so
you'd find sepia as crayon number 33. You don't have to memorize the
numbers! You can find them in a menu with a submenu for each family.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1141.png){width="2.1597222222222223in"
height="0.2569444444444444in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1142.png){width="7.55in"
height="2.1527777777777777in"}Or, if you know the crayon name, just .

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1148.png){width="5.793055555555555in"
height="0.3in"}The crayon numbers are chosen so that skipping by 10
gives a sensible box of ten crayons:

Alternatively, skipping by 5 gives a still-sensible set of twenty
crayons:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1149.png){width="5.8in" height="0.3in"}

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1150.png){width="6.245138888888889in"
height="0.25625in"}The set of *color numbers* is arranged so that each
color number is visually near each of its neighbors. Bright and dark
colors alternate for each family. Color numbers range from 0 to 99, like
crayon numbers, but you can use fractional numbers to get as tiny a step
as you like:

("As tiny as you like" isn't *quite* true because in the end, your color
has to be rounded to integer RGB values for display.)

Both of these scales include the range of shades of gray, from black to
white. Since black is the initial pen color, and black isn't a hue,
Scratch and Snap*!* users would traditionally try to use set color to
escape from black, and it wouldn't work. By including black in the same
scale as other colors, we eliminate the Black Hole problem if people use
only the recommended color scales.

We are making a point of saying "color number" for what was sometimes
called just "color" in earlier versions of the library, because we now
reserve the name "color" for an actual color, an instance of the color
data type.\
**How to Use the Library**

There are three library blocks specifically about controlling the pen.
They have the same names as three of the primitive Pen blocks:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image401.png){width="6.066666666666666in"
height="0.30833333333333335in"}

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1156.png){width="7.4875in"
height="1.1in"}The first (Pen block-colored) input slot is used to
select which color scale you want to use. (These blocks also allow
reading or setting two block properties that are not colors: the pen
size and its transparency.) The pen reporter requires no other inputs;
it reports the state of the pen in whatever dimension you choose.

As the last example shows, you can't ask for the pen color in a scale
incompatible with how you set it, unless the block can deduce what you
want from what it knows about the current pen color.

The change pen block applies only to numeric scales (including vectors
of three or four numbers). It adds its numeric or list input to the
current pen value(s), doing vector (item-by-item) addition for vector
scales.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1162.png){width="7.491666666666666in"
height="1.1069444444444445in"}The set pen block changes the pen color to
the value(s) you specify. The meaning of the white input slots depends
on which attribute of the pen you're setting:

In the last example, the number 37 sets the *transparency,* on the scale
0=opaque, 100=invisible. (All color attributes are on a 0--100 scale
except for RGB components, which are 0--255.) A transparency value can
be combined with any of these attribute scales.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image414.png){width="5.383333333333334in"
height="0.23333333333333334in"}The library also includes two
constructors and a selector for colors as a data type:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image402.png){width="1.8055555555555556in"
height="0.19444444444444445in"}The latter two are inverses of each
other, translating between colors and their attributes. The color from
block's attribute menu has fewer choices than the similar set pen block
because you can, for example, set the Red value of the existing pen
color leaving the rest unchanged, but when creating a color out of
nothing you have to provide its entire specification, e.g., all of Red,
Green, and Blue, or the equivalent in other scales. (As you'll see on
the next page, we provide two *linear* (one-dimensional) color scales
that allow you to specify a color with a single number, at the cost of
including only a small subset of the millions of colors your computer
can generate.) If you have a color and want another color that's the
same except for one number, as in the Red example, you can use this
block:

Finally, the library includes the mix block and a helper:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1181.png){width="6.113194444444445in"
height="0.23333333333333334in"}We'll have more to say about these after
a detour through color theory.

That's all you have to know about colors! *Crayons* for specific
interesting ones, *color numbers* for gradual transformation from one
color to the next. But there's a bit more to say, if you're interested.
If not, stop here. (But look at the samples of the different scales on
page 145.)\
**More about Colors: Fair Hues and Shades**

Several of the three-dimensional arrangements of colors use the concept
of "hue," which more or less means where a color would appear in a
rainbow (magenta, near the right, is [a long
story](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magenta)):

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1183.png){width="5.806666666666667in"
height="0.30666666666666664in"}

These are called "spectral" colors, after the *spectrum* of rainbow
colors. But these colors aren't equally distributed. There's an awful
lot of green, hardly any yellow, and just a sliver of orange. And no
brown at all.

And this is already a handwave, because the range of colors that can be
generated by RGB monitors doesn't include some of the *true* spectral
colors. See [Spectral
color](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectral_color) in Wikipedia for
all the gory details.

This isn't a problem with the physics of rainbows. It's in the human eye
and the human brain that certain ranges of wavelength of light waves are
lumped together as named colors. The eye is just "tuned" to recognize a
wide range of colors as green. (See [Rods and
Cones](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rods_and_cones).) And
different human cultures give names to different color ranges.
Nevertheless, in old Scratch projects, you'd say change pen color by 1
and it'd take forever to reach a color that wasn't green.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1184.png){width="5.9944444444444445in"
height="0.29930555555555555in"}For color professionals, there are good
reasons to want to work with the physical rainbow hue layout. But for
amateurs using a simplified, one-dimensional color model, there's no
reason not to use a more programmer-friendly hue scale:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1185.png){width="1.4597222222222221in"
height="1.3583333333333334in"}In this scale, each of the seven rainbow
colors and brown get an equal share. (Red's looks too small, but that's
because it's split between the two ends: hue 0 is pure red, brownish
reds are to its right, and purplish reds are wrapped around to the right
end.) We call this scale "fair hue" because each color family gets a
fair share of the total hue range. (By the way, you were probably taught
"... green, blue, indigo, violet" in school, but it turns out that color
names were different in Isaac Newton's day, and the color he called
"blue" is more like modern cyan, while his "indigo" is more like modern
blue. See Wikipedia [Indigo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indigo).)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1186.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1187.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1188.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1189.png){width="0.2361111111111111in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}Our *color number* scale is based on fair
hues, adding a range of grays from black (color number 0) to white
(color number14) and also adding *shades* of the spectral colors. (In
color terminology, a *shade* is a darker version of a color; a lighter
version is called a *tint.*) Why do we add shades but not tints? Partly
because I find shades more exciting. A shade of red can be dark candy
apple red or maroon , but a tint is just some kind of pink . This
admitted prejudice is supported by an objective fact: Most projects are
made on a white background, so dark colors stand out better than light
ones.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1190.png){width="5.999305555555556in"
height="1.507638888888889in"}So, in our color number scale, color
numbers 0 to 14 are kinds of gray; the remaining color numbers go
through the fair hues, but alternating full-strength colors with shades.

This chart shows how the color scales discussed so far are related. Note
that all scales range from 0 to 100; the fair hues scale has been
compressed in the chart so that similar colors line up vertically. (Its
dimensions are different because it doesn't include the grays at the
left. Since there are eight color families, the pure, named fair hues
are at multiples of 100/8=12.5, starting with red=0.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1192.png){width="1.85in"
height="1.0798611111111112in"}White is crayon 14 and color number 14.
This value was deliberately chosen *not* to be a multiple of 5 so that
the every-fifth-crayon and every-tenth-crayon selections don't include
it, so that all of the crayons in those smaller boxes are visible
against a white stage background.

Among purples, the official spectral violet (crayon 90) is the end of
the spectrum. Magenta, brighter than violet, isn't a spectral color at
all. (In the picture at the left, the top part is the spectrum of white
light spread out through a prism; the middle part is a photograph of a
rainbow, and the bottom part is a digital simulation of a rainbow.)
Magenta is a mixture of red and blue. (attribution: Wikipedia user
Andys. CC BY-SA.)

The light gray at color number 10 is slightly different from crayon 10
just because of roundoff in computing crayon values. Color number 90 is
different from crayon 90 because the official RGB violet (equal parts
red and blue) is actually lighter than spectral violet. The purple
family is also unusual because magenta, crayon and color number 95, is
lighter than the violet at 90. In other families, the color numbers,
crayons, and (scaled) fair hues all agree at multiples of ten. These
multiple-of-ten positions are the standard RGB primary and secondary
colors, e.g., the yellow at color number 50 is (255, 255, 0) in RGB.
(Gray, brown, and orange don't have such simple RGB settings.)

The color numbers at odd multiples of five are generally darker shades
than the corresponding crayons. The latter are often official named
shades, e.g., teal, crayon 65, is a half-intensity shade of cyan. The
odd-five *color numbers,* though, are often darker, since they are
chosen to be the darkest color in a given family that's visibly
different from black. The pink at color number 15, though, is quite
different from crayon 15, because the former is a pure tint of red,
whereas the crayon, to get a more interesting pink, has a little magenta
mixed in. Color numbers at multiples of five are looked up in a table;
other color values are determined by linear interpolation in RGB space.
(*Crayons* are of course all found by table lookup.)

The from color block behaves specially when you ask for the *color
number* of a color. Most colors don't exactly match a color number, and
for other attributes of a color (crayon number, X11 name) you don't get
an answer unless the color exactly matches one of the names or numbers
in that attribute. But for color number, the block tries to find the
*nearest color number* to the color you specify. The result will be only
approximate; you can't use the number you get to recreate the input
color. But you can start choosing nearby color numbers as you animate
the sprite.

### Perceptual Spaces: HSV and HSL

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1193.png){width="0.7361111111111112in"
height="0.7222222222222222in"}RGB is the right way to think about colors
if you're building or programming a display monitor; CMYK is the right
way if you're building or programming a color printer. But neither of
those coordinate systems is very intuitive if you're trying to
understand what color *you see* if, for example, you mix 37% red light,
52% green, and 11% blue. The *hue* scale is one dimension of most
attempts at a perceptual scale. The square at the right has pale blues
along the top edge, dark blues along the right edge, various shades of
gray toward the left, black at the bottom, and pure spectral blue in the
top right corner. Although no other point in the square is pure blue,
you can tell at a glance that no other spectral color is mixed with the
blue.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1194.png){width="2.691666666666667in"
height="1.1902777777777778in"}Aside from hue, the other two dimensions
of a color space have to represent how much white and/or black is mixed
with the spectral color. (Bear in mind that "mixing black" is a metaphor
when it comes to monitors. There really is black paint, but there's no
such thing as black light.) One such space, HSV, has one dimension for
the amount of color (vs. white), called *saturation,* and one for the
amount of black, imaginatively called *value.* HSV stands for
Hue-Saturation-Value. (Value is also called *brightness.*) The *value*
is actually measured backward from the above description; that is, if
value is 0, the color is pure black; if value is 100, then a saturation
of 0 means all white, no spectral color; a saturation of 100 means no
white at all. In the square in the previous paragraph, the *x* axis is
the saturation and the *y* axis is the value. The entire bottom edge is
black, but only the top left corner is white. HSV is the traditional
color space used in Scratch and Snap*!.* Set pen color set the hue; set
pen shade set the value. There was originally no Pen block to set the
saturation, but there's a set brightness effect Looks block to control
the saturation of the sprite's costume. (I speculate that the Scratch
designers, like me, thought tints were less vivid than shades against a
white background, so they made it harder to control tinting.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1195.png){width="1.5638888888888889in"
height="0.29305555555555557in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1196.png){width="1.5555555555555556in"
height="0.2659722222222222in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1197.png){width="0.7638888888888888in"
height="0.7638888888888888in"}But if you're looking at colors on a
computer display, HSV isn't really a good match for human perception.
Intuitively, black and white should be treated symmetrically. This is
the HSL (hue-saturation-lightness) color space. *Saturation,* in HSL, is
a measure of the *grayness* or *dullness* of a color (how close it comes
to being on a black-and-white scale) and *lightness* measures
*spectralness* with pure white at one end, pure black at the other end,
and spectral color in the middle. The *saturation* number is actually
the opposite of grayness: 0 means pure gray, and 100 means pure spectral
color, provided that the *lightness* is 50, midway between black and
white. Colors with lightness other than 50 have some black or white
mixed in, but saturation 100 means that the color is as fully saturated
as it can be, given the amount of white or black needed to achieve that
lightness. Saturation less than 100 means that *both white and black*
are mixed with the spectral color. (Such mixtures are called *tones* of
the spectral color. Perceptually, colors with saturation 100% don't look
gray: but colors with saturation 75% do:

Note that HSV and HSL both have a dimension called "saturation," but
*they're not the same thing!* In HSV, "saturation" means non-whiteness,
whereas in HSL it means non-grayness (vividness).

More fine print: It's misleading to talk about the spectrum of light
wavelengths as if it were the same as perceived hue. If your computer
display is showing you a yellow area, for example, it's doing it by
turning on its red and green LEDs over that area, and what hits your
retina *is still two wavelengths of light, red and green, superimposed.*
You could make what's perceptually the same yellow by using a single
intermediate wavelength. Your eye and brain don't distinguish between
those two kinds of yellow. Also, your brain automatically adjusts
perceived hue to correct for differences in illumination. When you place
a monochrome object so that it's half in sunlight and half in the shade,
you see it as one even though what's reaching your eyes from the two
regions differs a lot. And, sadly, it's HSL whose use of "saturation"
disagrees with the official international color vocabulary
standardization committee. I learned all this from [this
tutorial](http://www.huevaluechroma.com/011.php), which you might find
more coherent than jumping around Wikipedia if you're interested.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1198.png){width="1.64375in"
height="0.8416666666666667in"}Although traditional Scratch and Snap*!*
use HSV in programs, they use HSL in the color picker. The horizontal
axis is hue (fair hue, in this version) and the vertical axis is
*lightness,* the scale with black at one end and white at the other end.
It would make no sense to have only the bottom half of this selector
(HSV Value) or only the top half (HSV Saturation). And, given that you
can only fit two dimensions on a flat screen, it makes sense to pick HSL
saturation (vividness) as the one to keep at 100%. (In this fair-hue
picker, some colors appear twice: "spectral" (50% lightness) browns as
shades (≈33% lightness) of red or orange, and shades of those browns.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1199.png){width="0.20277777777777778in"
height="0.20277777777777778in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1200.png){width="0.18888888888888888in"
height="0.18888888888888888in"}Software that isn't primarily about
colors (so, *not* including Photoshop, for example) typically use HSV or
HSL, with web-based software more likely to use HSV because that's
what's built into the JavaScript programming language provided by
browsers. But if the goal is to model human color perception, neither of
these color spaces is satisfactory, because they assume that all
full-intensity spectral colors are equally bright. But if you're like
most people, you see spectral yellow as much brighter than spectral blue
. There are better perceptual color spaces with names like L\*u\*v\* and
L\*a\*b\* that are based on research with human subjects to determine
true perceived brightness. Wikipedia explains all this and more at [HSL
and HSV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HSL_and_HSV), where they
recommend ditching both of these simplistic color spaces.

###  Mixing Colors

Given first class colors, the next question is, what operations apply to
them, the way arithmetic operators apply to numbers and higher order
functions apply to lists? The equivalent to adding numbers is mixing
colors, but unfortunately there isn't a simple answer to what that
means.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1201.png){width="4.347222222222222in"
height="0.5625in"}The easiest kind of color mixing to understand is
*additive* mixing, which is what happens when you shine two colored
lights onto a (white) wall. It's also what happens in your computer
screen, where each dot (pixel) of an image is created by a tiny red
light, a tiny green light, and a tiny blue light that can be combined at
different strengths to make different colors. Essentially, additive
mixing of two colors is computed by adding the two red components, the
two green components, and the two blue components. It's not *quite* that
simple only because each component of the result must be in the range 0
to 255. So, red (255, 0, 0) mixed with green (0, 255, 0) gives (255,
255, 0), which is yellow. But red (255, 0, 0) plus yellow (255, 255, 0)
can't give (510, 255, 0). Just limiting the red in the result to 255
would mean that red plus yellow is yellow, which doesn't make sense.
Instead, if the red value has to be reduced by half (from 510 to 255),
then *all three* values must be reduced by half, so the result is (255,
128, 0), which is orange. (Half of 255 is 127.5, but each RGB value must
be an integer.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1205.png){width="4.492361111111111in"
height="0.55in"}A different kind of color mixing based on light is done
when different colored transparent plastic sheets are held in front of a
white light, as is done in theatrical lighting. In that situation, the
light that gets through both filters is what remains after some light is
filtered out by the first one and some of what's left is filtered out by
the second one. In red-green-blue terms, a red filter filters out green
and blue; a yellow filter allows red and green through, filtering out
blue. But there isn't any green light for the yellow filter to pass; it
was filtered out by the red filter. Each filter can only remove light,
not add light, so this is called *subtractive* mixing:

Perhaps confusingly, the numerical computation of subtractive mixing is
done by *multiplying* the RGB values, taken as fractions of the maximum
255, so red (1, 0, 0) times yellow (1, 1, 0) is red again.

Those are both straightforward to compute. Much, much more complicated
is trying to simulate the result of mixing *paints.* It's not just that
we'd have to compute a more complicated function of the red, green, and
blue values; it's that RGB values (or any other three-dimensional color
space) are inadequate to describe the behavior of paints. Two paints can
look identical, and have the same RGB values, but may still behave very
differently when mixed with other colors. The differences are mostly due
to the chemistry of the paints, but are also affected by exactly how the
colors are mixed. The mixing is mostly subtractive; red paint *absorbs*
most of the colors other than red, so what's reflected off the surface
is whatever isn't absorbed by the colors being mixed. But there can be
an additive component also.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1209.gif){width="7.5in"
height="0.875in"}The proper mathematical abstraction to describe a paint
is a *reflectance* graph, like this:

(These aren't paints, but minerals, and one software-generated spectrum,
from the US Geological Survey's [Spectral
Library](https://www.usgs.gov/labs/spec-lab/capabilities/spectral-library).
The details don't matter, just the fact that a graph like these gives
much more information than three RGB numbers.) To mix two paints
properly, you multiply the *y* values (as fractions) at each matching
*x* coordinate of the two graphs.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1221.png){width="4.627777777777778in"
height="0.5763888888888888in"} Having said all that, the mix block takes
the colors it is given as inputs and converts them into what we hope are
*typical* paint reflectance spectra that would look like those colors,
and then mixes those spectra and converts back to RGB.

But unlike the other two kinds of mixing, in this case we can't say that
these colors are "the right answer"; what would happen with real paints
depends on their chemical composition and how they're mixed. There are
three more mixing options, but these three are the ones that correspond
to real-world color mixing.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1225.png){width="4.340277777777778in"
height="0.6527777777777778in"}The mix block will accept any number of
colors, and will mix them in equal proportion. If (for any kind of
mixing) you want more of one color than another, use the color at weight
block to make a "weighted color":

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1226.png){width="5.166666666666667in"
height="0.4305555555555556in"}This mixes four parts red paint to one
part green paint. All colors in a mixture can be weighted:

(Thanks to [Scott
Burns](http://scottburns.us/subtractive-color-mixture/) for his help in
understanding paint mixing, along with [David
Briggs](http://www.huevaluechroma.com/061.php)'s tutorial. Remaining
mistakes are bh's.)

### tl;dr

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1227.png){width="1.9326388888888888in"
height="2.220833333333333in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1231.png){width="2.227777777777778in"
height="2.267361111111111in"}For normal people, Snap*!* provides three
simple, one-dimensional scales: *[crayons]{.underline}* for specific
interesting colors, *[color numbers]{.underline}* for a continuum of
high-contrast colors with a range of hues and shading, and *[fair
hues]{.underline}* for a continuum without shading. For color nerds, it
provides three-dimensional color spaces RGB, HSL, HSV, and fair-hue
variants of the latter two. We recommend "fair HSL" for zeroing in on a
desired color.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1235.png){width="1.5347222222222223in"
height="1.8472222222222223in"}

### ![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1236.png){width="2.2111111111111112in" height="2.267361111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1240.png){width="2.061111111111111in" height="2.2222222222222223in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1244.png){width="1.9152777777777779in" height="2.234722222222222in"} Subappendix: Geeky details on fair hue

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1248.png){width="6.2375in"
height="2.5in"}The left graph shows that, unsurprisingly, all of the
brown fair hues make essentially no progress in real hue, with the
orange-brown section actually a little retrograde, since browns are
really shades of orange and so the real hues overlap between fair browns
and fair oranges. Green makes up some of the distance, because there are
too many green real hues and part of the goal of the fair hue scale is
to squeeze that part of the hue spectrum. But much of the catching up
happens very quickly, between pure magenta at fair hue 93.75 and the
start of the purple-red section at fair hue 97. This abrupt change is
unfortunate, but the alternatives involve either stealing space from red
or stealing space from purple (which already has to include both
spectral violet and RGB magenta). The graph has discontinuous derivative
at the table-lookup points, of which there are two in each color family,
one at the pure-named-RGB colors at multiples of 12.5, and the other
*roughly* halfway to the next color family, except for the purple
family, which has lookup points at 87.5 (approximate spectral violet),
93.75 (RGB magenta), and 97 (turning point toward the red family). (In
the color picker, blue captures cyan and purple space in dark shades.
This, too, is an artifact of human vision.)

The right graph shows the HSV saturation and value for all the fair
hues. Saturation is at 100%, as it should be in a hue scale, except for
a very slight drop in part of the browns. (Browns are shades of orange,
not tints, so one would expect full saturation, except that some of the
browns are actually mixtures with related hues.) But value, also as
expected, falls substantially in the browns, to a low of about 56%
(halfway to black) for the "pure" brown at 45° (fair hue 12.5). But the
curve is smooth, without inflection points other than that minimum-value
pure brown.

"Fair saturation" and "fair value" are by definition 100% for the entire
range of fair hues. This means that in the browns, the real saturation
and value are the product (in percent) of the innate shading of the
specific brown fair hue and the user's fair saturation/value setting.
When the user's previous color setting was in a real scale and the new
setting is in a fair scale, the program assumes that the previous
saturation and value were entirely user-determined; when the previous
color setting was in a brown fair hue and the new setting is also in a
fair scale, the program remembers the user's intention from the previous
setting. (Internal calculations are based on HSV, even though we
recommend HSL to users, because HSV comes to us directly from the
JavaScript color management implementation.) This is why the set pen
block includes options for "fair saturation" and so on.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1252.png){width="5.9875in"
height="0.3784722222222222in"}For the extra-geeky, here are the exact
table lookup points (fair hue, \[0,100\]):

and here are the RGB settings at those points:

### ![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1253.png){width="5.9840277777777775in" height="1.3736111111111111in"} Subappendix: Geeky details on color numbers

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1254.png){width="2.0833333333333335in"
height="2.2916666666666665in"}Here is a picture of integer color
numbers, but remember that color numbers are continuous. (As usual,
"continuous" values are ultimately converted to integer RGB values, so
there's really some granularity.) Color numbers 0-14 are continuously
varying grayscale, from 0=black to 14=white. Color numbers 14+ε to 20
are linearly varying shades of pink, with RGB Red at color number 20.

Beyond that point, in each color family, the multiple of ten color
number in the middle is the RGB standard color of that family, in which
each component is either 255 or 0. (Exceptions are brown, which is of
course darker than any of those colors; orange, with its green component
half-strength: \[255, 127, 0\]; and violet, discussed below.) The
following multiple of five is the number of the darkest color in that
family, although not necessarily the same hue as the multiple of ten
color number. Color numbers between the multiple of ten and the
following multiple of five are shades of colors entirely within the
family. Color numbers in the four *before* the multiple of ten are
mixtures of this family and the one before it. So, for example, in the
green family, we have

55 Darkest yellow.

(55, 60) shades of yellow-green mixtures. As the color number increases,
both the hue and the lightness (or value, depending on your religion)
increase, so we get brighter and greener colors.

60 Canonical green, \[0, 255, 0\], whose W3C color name is "lime," not
"green."

(60, 65) Shades of green. No cyan mixed in.

65 Darkest green.

(65,70) Shades of green-cyan mixtures.

In the color number chart, all the dark color numbers look a lot like
black, but they're quite different. Here are the darkest colors in each
color number family.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1255.png){width="1.3888888888888888in"
height="1.3888888888888888in"}Darkest yellow doesn't look entirely
yellow. You might see it as greenish or brownish. As it turns out, the
darkest color that really looks yellow is hardly dark at all. This color
was hand-tweaked to look neither green nor brown to me, but ymmv.

In some families, the center+5 *crayon* is an important named darker
version of the center color: In the red family, \[128, 0, 0\] is
"maroon." In the cyan family, \[0, 128, 128\] is "teal." An early
version of the color number scale used these named shades as the
center+5 color number also. But on this page we use the word "darkest"
advisedly: You can't find a darker shade of this family anywhere in the
color number scale, but you *can* find lighter shades. Teal is color
number 73.1, ($70 + 5 \bullet \frac{255 - 128}{255 - 50}$), because
darkest cyan, color 75, is \[0, 50, 50\]. The color number for maroon is
left as an exercise for the reader.

The purple family is different from the others, because it has to
include both spectral violet and extraspectral RGB magenta. Violet is
usually given as RGB \[128, 0, 255\], but that's much brighter than the
violet in an actual spectrum (see page 142). We use \[80, 0, 90\], a
value hand-tweaked to look as much as possible like the violet in
rainbow photos, as color number 90. (*Crayon* 90 is \[128, 0, 255\].)
Magenta, \[255, 0, 255\], is color number 95. This means that the colors
get *brighter,* not darker, between 90 and 95. The darkest violet is
actually color number 87.5, so it's bluer than standard violet, but
still plainly a purple and not a blue. It's \[39,0,76\]. It's *not*
hand-tweaked; it's a linear interpolation between darkest blue, \[0, 0,
64\], and the violet at color number 90. I determined by experiment that
color number 87.5 is the darkest one that's still unambiguously purple.
(According to Wikipedia, "violet" names only the spectral color, while
"purple" is the name of the whole color family.)

Here are the reference points for color numbers that are multiples of
five, except for item 4, which is used for color 14, not color 15:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1256.png){width="4.583333333333333in"
height="1.2777777777777777in"}

 Appendix B. APL features {#appendix-b.-apl-features .ListParagraph}
