                ---
                title: 3. Chapter 3: Saving and Loading Projects and Media

                layout: home
                has_children: true
                has_toc: false
                nav_order: 4
                ---


After you've created a project, you'll want to save it, so that you can
have access to it the next time you use Snap*!*. There are two ways to
do that. You can save a project on your own computer, or you can save it
at the Snap*!* web site. The advantage of saving on the net is that you
have access to your project even if you are using a different computer,
or a mobile device such as a tablet or smartphone. The advantage of
saving on your computer is that you have access to the saved project
while on an airplane or otherwise not on the net. Also, cloud projects
are limited in size, but you can have all the costumes and sounds you
like if you save locally. This is why we have multiple ways to save.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image487.png){width="3.548611111111111in"
height="2.576388888888889in"}In either case, if you choose "Save as..."
from the File menu. You'll see something like this:

(If you are not logged in to your Snap*!* cloud account, Computer will
be the only usable option.) The text box at the bottom right of the Save
dialog allows you to enter project notes that are saved with the
project.

Local Storage
-------------

Click on Computer and Snap*!*'s Save Project dialog window will be
replaced by your operating system's standard save window. If your
project has a name, that name will be the default filename if you don't
give a different name. Another, equivalent way to save to disk is to
choose "Export project" from the File menu.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image488.png){width="1.2340277777777777in" height="2.329861111111111in"}Creating a Cloud Account
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image489.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}The other possibility is to save your
project "in the cloud," at the Snap*!* web site. In order to do this,
you need an account with us. Click on the Cloud button ( ) in the Tool
Bar. Choose the "Signup..." option. This will show you a window that
looks like the picture at the right.

You must choose a user name that will identify you on the web site, such
as Jens or bh. If you're a Scratch user, you can use your Scratch name
for Snap*!* too. If you're a kid, don't pick a user name that includes
your family name, but first names or initials are okay. Don't pick
something you'd be embarrassed to have other users (or your parents)
see! If the name you want is already taken, you'll have to choose
another one. You must also supply a password.

We ask for your month and year of birth; we use this information only to
decide whether to ask for your own email address or your parent's email
address. (If you're a kid, you shouldn't sign up for anything on the
net, not even Snap*!*, without your parent's knowledge.) We do not store
your birthdate information on our server; it is used on your own
computer only during this initial signup. We do not ask for your *exact*
birthdate, even for this one-time purpose, because that's an important
piece of personally identifiable information.

When you click OK, an email will be sent to the email address you gave,
asking you to verify (by clicking a link) that it's really your email
address. We keep your email address on file so that, if you forget your
password, we can send you a password-reset link. We will also email you
if your account is suspended for violation of the Terms of Service. We
do not use your address for any other purpose. You will never receive
marketing emails of any kind through this site, neither from us nor from
third parties. If, nevertheless, you are worried about providing this
information, do a web search for "temporary email."

Finally, you must read and agree to the Terms of Service. A quick
summary: Don't interfere with anyone else's use of the web site, and
don't put copyrighted media or personally identifiable information in
projects that you share with other users. And we're not responsible if
something goes wrong. (Not that we *expect* anything to go wrong; since
Snap*!* runs in JavaScript in your browser, it is strongly isolated from
the rest of your computer. But the lawyers make us say this.)

Saving to the Cloud
-------------------

Once you've created your account, you can log into it using the
"Login..." option from the Cloud menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image490.png){width="1.6875in"
height="2.0277777777777777in"}Use the user name and password that you
set up earlier. If you check the "Stay signed in" box, then you will be
logged in automatically the next time you run Snap*!* from the same
browser on the same computer. Check the box if you're using your own
computer and you don't share it with siblings. *Don't* check the box if
you're using a public computer at the library, at school, etc.

Once logged in, you can choose the "Cloud" option in the "Save Project"
dialog shown on page 37. You enter a project name, and optionally
project notes; your project will be saved online and can be loaded from
anywhere with net access. The project notes will be visible to other
users if you publish your project.

Loading Saved Projects
----------------------

Once you've saved a project, you want to be able to load it back into
Snap*!*. There are two ways to do this:

1\. If you saved the project in your online Snap*!* account, choose the
"Open..." option from the File menu. Choose the "Cloud" button, then
select your project from the list in the big text box and click OK, or
choose the "Computer" button to open an operating system open dialog. (A
third button, "Examples," lets you choose from example projects that we
provide. You can see what each of these projects is about by clicking on
it and reading its project notes.)

2\. If you saved the project as an XML file on your computer, choose
"Import..." from the File menu. This will give you an ordinary browser
file-open window, in which you can navigate to the file as you would in
other software. Alternatively, find the XML file on your desktop, and
just drag it onto the Snap*!* window.

The second technique above also allows you to import media (costumes and
sounds) into a project. Just choose "Import..." and then select a
picture or sound file instead of an XML file.

Snap*!* can also import projects created in BYOB 3.0 or 3.1, or (with
some effort; see our web site) in Scratch 1.4, 2.0 or 3.0. Almost all
such projects work correctly in Snap*!*, apart from a small number of
incompatible blocks.

If you saved projects in an earlier version of Snap*!* using the
"Browser" option, then a Browser button will be shown in the Open dialog
to allow you to retrieve those projects. But you can save them only with
the Computer and Cloud options.

If you lose your project, do this first!
----------------------------------------

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image384.png){width="0.3194444444444444in"
height="0.18055555555555555in"}If you are still in **Snap*!*** and
realize that you've loaded another project without saving the one you
were working on: ***Don't edit the new project.*** From the File menu
choose the Restore unsaved project option.

Restore unsaved project will also work if you log out of Snap*!* and
later log back in, as long as you don't edit another project meanwhile.
Snap*!* remembers only the most recent project that you've edited (not
just opened, but actually changed in the project editor).

If your project on the cloud is missing, empty, or otherwise broken and
isn't the one you edited most recently, or if Restore unsaved project
fails: ***Don't edit the broken project.*** In the Open... box, enter
your project name, then push the Recover button. *Do this right away,*
because we save only the version before the most recent, and the latest
before today. So don't keep saving bad versions; Recover right away. The
Recover feature works only on a project version that you actually saved,
so Restore unsaved project is your first choice if you switch away from
a project without saving it.

To help you remember to save your projects, when you've edited the
project and haven't yet saved it, Snap*!* displays a pencil icon to the
left of the project name on the toolbar at the top of the window:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image491.png){width="6.29671697287839in"
height="0.5138888888888888in"}

Private and Public Projects
---------------------------

By default, a project you save in the cloud is private; only you can see
it. There are two ways to make a project available to others. If you
share a project, you can give your friends a project URL (in your
browser's URL bar after you open the project) they can use to read it.
If you publish a project, it will appear on the Snap*!* web site, and
the whole world can see it. In any case, nobody other than you can ever
overwrite your project; if others ask to save it, they get their own
copy in their own account.

 Building a Block
================

The first version of Snap*!* was called BYOB, for "Build Your Own
Blocks." This was the first and is still the most important capability
we added to Scratch. (The name was changed because a few teachers have
no sense of humor. ☹ You pick your battles.) Scratch 2.0 and later also
has a partial custom block capability.

Simple Blocks
-------------

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image495.png){width="7.5in"
height="2.7152777777777777in"}In every palette, at or near the bottom,
is a button labeled "Make a block." Also, floating near the top of the
palette is a plus sign. Also, the menu you get by right-clicking on the
background of the scripting area has a "make a block" option.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image501.png){width="2.2708333333333335in"
height="2.3472222222222223in"}Clicking any of these will display a
dialog window in which you choose the block's name, shape, and
palette/color. You also decide whether the block will be available to
all sprites, or only to the current sprite and its children.

In this dialog box, you can choose the block\'s palette, shape, and
name. With one exception, there is one color per palette, e.g., all
Motion blocks are blue. But the Variables palette includes the orange
variable-related blocks and the red list-related blocks. Both colors are
available, along with an "Other" option that makes grey blocks in the
Variables palette for blocks that don't fit any category.

There are three block shapes, following a convention that should be
familiar to Scratch users: The jigsaw-puzzle-piece shaped blocks are
Commands, and don't report a value. The oval blocks are Reporters, and
the hexagonal blocks are Predicates, which is the technical term for
reporters that report Boolean (true or false) values.

Suppose you want to make a block named "square" that draws a square. You
would choose Motion, Command, and type "square" into the name field.
When you click OK, you enter the Block Editor. This works just like
making a script in the sprite's scripting area, except that the "hat"
block at the top, instead of saying something like "when I am clicked,"
has a picture of the block you're building. This hat block is called the
*prototype* of your custom block.[^3] You drag blocks under the hat to
program your custom block, then click OK:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image502.png){width="4.210937226596675in"
height="1.3364041994750657in"}

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image503.png){width="4.615555555555556in"
height="3.647777777777778in"}

Your block appears at the bottom of the Motion palette. Here's the block
and the result of using it:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image504.png){width="4.242361111111111in"
height="1.4166666666666667in"}

###  Custom Blocks with Inputs

But suppose you want to be able to draw squares of different sizes.
Control-click or right-click on the block, choose "edit," and the Block
Editor will open. Notice the plus signs before and after the word square
in the prototype block. If you hover the mouse over one, it lights up:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image508.png){width="3.4444444444444446in"
height="2.7222222222222223in"}

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image509.png){width="2.5833333333333335in"
height="1.6041666666666667in"}Click on the plus on the right. You will
then see the "input name" dialog:

Type in the name "size" and click OK. There are other options in this
dialog; you can choose "title text" if you want to add words to the
block name, so it can have text after an input slot, like the "move ( )
steps" block. Or you can select a more extensive dialog with a lot of
options about your input name. But we'll leave that for later. When you
click OK, the new input appears in the block prototype:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image510.png){width="1.4791666666666667in"
height="1.4895833333333333in"}You can now drag the orange variable down
into the script, then click okay:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image511.png){width="1.474724409448819in"
height="1.495495406824147in"}

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image512.png){width="0.6979166666666666in"
height="0.25in"}Your block now appears in the Motion palette with an
input box: You can draw any size square by entering the length of its
side in the box and running the block as usual, by clicking it or by
putting it in a script.

### Editing Block Properties

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image513.png){width="0.9993055555555556in"
height="0.7604166666666666in"}What if you change your mind about a
block's color (palette) or shape (command, reporter, predicate)? If you
click in the hat block at the top that holds the prototype, but not in
the prototype itself, you'll see a window in which you can change the
color, and *sometimes* the shape, namely, if the block is not used in
any script, whether in a scripting area or in another custom block.
(This includes a one-block script consisting of a copy of the new block
pulled out of the palette into the scripting area, seeing which made you
realize it's the wrong category. Just delete that copy (drag it back to
the palette) and then change the category.)

If you right-click/control-click the hat block, you get this menu:

Script pic exports a picture of the script. (Many of the illustrations
in this manual were made that way.) Translations opens a window in which
you can specify how your block should be translated if the user chooses
a language other than the one in which you are programming. Block
variables lets you create a variant of script variables for this block:
A script variable is created when a block is called, and it disappears
when that call finishes. What if you want a variable that's local to
this block, as a script variable is, but doesn't disappear between
invocations? That's a block variable. If the definition of a block
includes a block variable, then every time that (custom) block is
dragged from the palette into a script, the block variable is created.
Every time *that copy* of the block is called, it uses the same block
variable, which preserves its value between calls. Other copies of the
block have their own block variables. The in palette checkbox determines
whether or not this block will be visible in the palette. It's normally
checked, but you may want to hide custom blocks if you're a curriculum
writer creating a Parsons problem. To unhide blocks, choose "Hide
blocks" from the File menu and uncheck the checkboxes. Edit does the
same thing as regular clicking, as described earlier.

Recursion
---------

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image514.png){width="2.9652777777777777in"
height="2.3631944444444444in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image515.png){width="1.9583333333333333in"
height="2.3541666666666665in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image516.png){width="1.4236111111111112in"
height="0.9118055555555555in"}Since the new custom block appears in its
palette as soon as you *start* editing it, you can write recursive
blocks (blocks that call themselves) by dragging the block into its own
definition:

(If you added inputs to the block since opening the editor, click Apply
before finding the block in the palette, or drag the block from the top
of the block editor rather than from the palette.)

If recursion is new to you, here are a few brief hints: It's crucial
that the recursion have a *base case,* that is, some small(est) case
that the block can handle without using recursion. In this example, it's
the case depth=0, for which the block does nothing at all, because of
the enclosing if. Without a base case, the recursion would run forever,
calling itself over and over.

Don't try to trace the exact sequence of steps that the computer follows
in a recursive program. Instead, imagine that inside the computer there
are many small people, and if Theresa is drawing a tree of size 100,
depth 6, she hires Tom to make a tree of size 70, depth 5, and later
hires Theo to make another tree of size 70, depth 5. Tom in turn hires
Tammy and Tallulah, and so on. Each little person has his or her own
local variables size and depth, each with different values.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image517.png){width="4.8380686789151355in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}You can also write recursive reporters,
like this block to compute the factorial function:

Note the use of the report block. When a reporter block uses this block,
the reporter finishes its work and reports the value given; any further
blocks in the script are not evaluated. Thus, the if else block in the
script above could have been just an if, with the second report block
below it instead of inside it, and the result would be the same, because
when the ﬁrst report is seen in the base case, that finishes the block
invocation, and the second report is ignored. There is also a stop this
block block that has a similar purpose, ending the block invocation
early, for command blocks. (By contrast, the stop this script block
stops not only the current block invocation, but also the entire
toplevel script that called it.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image521.png){width="4.291666666666667in"
height="0.8645833333333334in"}Here's a slightly more compact way to
write the factorial function:

For more on recursion, see *Thinking Recursively* by Eric Roberts. (The
original edition is ISBN **978‑0471816522; a more recent *Thinking
Recursively in Java* is ISBN 978-0471701460.)**

Block Libraries
---------------

When you save a project (see Chapter II above), any custom blocks you've
made are saved with it. But sometimes you'd like to save a collection of
blocks that you expect to be useful in more than one project. Perhaps
your blocks implement a particular data structure (a stack, or a
dictionary, etc.), or they're the framework for building a multilevel
game. Such a collection of blocks is called a *block library.*

*\
*To create a block library, choose "Export blocks..." from the File
menu. You then see a window like this:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image522.png){width="2.0215277777777776in"
height="2.7222222222222223in"}The window shows all of your global custom
blocks. You can uncheck some of the checkboxes to select exactly which
blocks you want to include in your library. (You can right-click or
control-click on the export window for a menu that lets you check or
uncheck all the boxes at once.) Then press OK. An XML file containing
the blocks will appear in your Downloads location.

To import a block library, use the "Import..." command in the File menu,
or just drag the XML file into the Snap*!* window.

Several block libraries are included with Snap*!*; for details about
them, see page 25.

Custom blocks and Visible Stepping
----------------------------------

Visible stepping normally treats a call to a custom block as a single
step. If you want to see stepping inside a custom block you must take
these steps *in order:*

1.  ![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image123.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
    height="0.16666666666666666in"}Turn on Visible Stepping.

2.  Select "Edit" in the context menu(s) of the block(s) you want to
    examine.

3.  Then start the program.

The Block Editor windows you open in step 2 do not have full editing
capability. You can tell because there is only one "OK" button at the
bottom, not the usual three buttons. Use the button to close these
windows when done stepping.

First class lists
