                ---
                title: 9. Chapter 9: User Interface Elements

                layout: home
                has_children: true
                has_toc: false
                nav_order: 10
                ---


In this chapter we describe in detail the various buttons, menus, and
other clickable elements of the Snap*!* user interface. Here again is
the map of the Snap*!* window:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image987.png){width="7.494419291338582in"
height="4.663194444444445in"}

Tool Bar Features
-----------------

Holding down the Shift key while clicking on any of the menu buttons
gives access to an extended menu with options, shown in red, that are
experimental or for use by the developers. We're not listing those extra
options here because they change frequently and you shouldn't rely on
them. But they're not secrets.

### The Snap*!* Logo Menu

The Snap*!* logo at the left end of the tool bar is clickable. It shows
a menu of options about Snap*!* itself:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image988.png){width="2.3292213473315835in"
height="1.02in"}

The About option displays information about Snap*!* itself, including
version numbers for the source modules, the implementors, and the
license (AGPL: you can do anything with it except create proprietary
versions, basically).

The Reference manual option downloads a copy of the latest revision of
this manual in PDF format.

The Snap! website option opens a browser window pointing to
snap.berkeley.edu, the web site for Snap*!*.

The Download source option opens a browser window displaying the Github
repository of the source files for Snap*!*. At the bottom of the page
are links to download the latest official release. Or you can navigate
around the site to find the current development version. You can read
the code to learn how Snap*!* is implemented, host a copy on your own
computer (this is one way to keep working while on an airplane), or make
a modified version with customized features. (However, access to cloud
accounts is limited to the official version hosted at Berkeley.)

### The File Menu

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image384.png){width="0.3194444444444444in"
height="0.18055555555555555in"}The file icon shows a menu mostly about
saving and loading projects. You may not see all these options, if you
don't have multiple sprites, scenes, custom blocks, and custom
categories.

The Notes option opens a window in which you can type notes about the
project: How to use it, what it does, whose project you modified to
create it, if any, what other sources of ideas you used, or any other
information about the project. This text is saved with the project, and
is useful if you share it with other users.

The New option starts a new, empty project. Any project you were working
on before disappears, so you are asked to confirm that this is really
what you want. (It disappears only from the current working Snap*!*
window; you should save the current project, if you want to keep it,
before using New.)

Note the \^N at the end of the line. This indicates that you can type
control-N as a shortcut for this menu item. Alas, this is not the case
in every browser. Some Mac browsers require command-N (⌘N) instead,
while others open a new browser window instead of a new project. You'll
have to experiment. In general, the keyboard shortcuts in Snap*!* are
the standard ones you expect in other software.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image989.png){width="2.8895833333333334in"
height="2.097916666666667in"}The Open... option shows a project open
dialog box in which you can choose a project to open:

In this dialog, the three large buttons at the left select a source of
projects: Cloud means your Snap*!* account's cloud storage. Examples
means a collection of sample projects we provide. Computer is for
projects saved on your own computer; when you click it, this dialog is
replaced with your computer's system dialog for opening files. The text
box to the right of those buttons is an alphabetical listing of projects
from that source; selecting a project by clicking shows its thumbnail (a
picture of the stage when it was saved) and its project notes at the
right.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image990.png){width="2.7243055555555555in"
height="1.9777777777777779in"}The search bar at the top can be used to
find a project by name or text in the project notes. So in this example:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image991.png){width="2.723611111111111in"
height="1.9777777777777779in"}I was looking for my ice cream projects
and typed "crea" in the search bar, then wondered why "ferris" matched.
But then when I clicked on ferris I saw this:

My search matched the word "re*crea*te" in the project notes.

The six buttons at the bottom select an action to perform on the
selected project. In the top row, Recover looks in your cloud account
for older versions of the chosen project. ***If your project is damaged,
don't keep saving broken versions! Use Recover first thing.*** You will
see a list of saved versions; choose one to open it. Typically, you'll
see the most recent version before the last save, and the newest version
saved before today. Then come buttons Share/Unshare and
Publish/Unpublish. The labelling of the buttons depends on your
project's publication status. If a project is neither shared nor
published (the ones in lightface type in the project list), it is
private and nobody can see it except you, its owner. If it is shared
(boldface in the project list), then when you open it you'll see a URL
like this one:

https://snap.berkeley.edu/snapsource/snap.html\#present:Username=bh&ProjectName=count%20change

but with your username and project name. ("%20" in the project name
represents a space, which can't be part of a URL.) Anyone who knows this
URL can see your project. Finally, if your project is ***published***
(***bold italic*** in the list), then your project is shown on the
Snap*!* web site for all the world to see. (In all of these cases, you
are the only one who can *write* to (save) your project. If another user
saves it, a separate copy will be saved in that user's account. Projects
remember the history of who created the original version and any other
"remix" versions along the way.

In the second row, the first button, Open, loads the project into
Snap*!* and closes the dialog box. The next button (if Cloud is the
source) is Delete, and if clicked it deletes the selected project.
Finally, the Cancel button closes the dialog box without opening a
project. (It does not undo any sharing, unsharing, or deletion you've
done.)

Back to the File menu, the Save menu option saves the project to the
same source and same name that was used when opening the project. (If
you opened another user's shared project or an example project, the
project will be saved to your own cloud account. You must be logged in
to save to the cloud.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image992.png){width="3.236111111111111in"
height="2.3493055555555555in"}The Save as... menu option opens a dialog
box in which you can specify where to save the project:

This is much like the Open dialog, except for the horizontal text box at
the top, into which you type a name for the project. You can also
publish, unpublish, share, unshare, and delete projects from here. There
is no Recover button.

The Import... menu option is for bringing some external resource into
the current project, or it can load an entirely separate project, from
your local disk. You can import costumes (any picture format that your
browser supports), sounds (again, any format supported by your browser),
and block libraries or sprites (XML format, previously exported from
Snap*!* itself). Imported costumes and sounds will belong to the
currently selected sprite; imported blocks are global (for all sprites).
Using the Import option is equivalent to dragging the file from your
desktop onto the Snap*!* window.

Depending on your browser, the Export project... option either directly
saves to your disk or opens a new browser tab containing your complete
project in XML notation (a plain text format). You can then use the
browser's Save feature to save the project as an XML file, which should
be named *something*.xml so that Snap*!* will recognize it as a project
when you later drag it onto a Snap*!* window. This is an alternative to
saving the project to your cloud account: keeping it on your own
computer. It is equivalent to choosing Computer from the Save dialog
described earlier.

The Export summary... option creates a web page, in HTML, with all of
the information about your project: its name, its project notes, a
picture of what's on its stage, definitions of global blocks, and then
per-sprite information: name, wardrobe (list of costumes), and local
variables and block definitions. The page can be converted to PDF by the
browser; it's intended to meet the documentation requirements of the
Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles create task.

The Export blocks... option is used to create a block library. It
presents a list of all the global (for all sprites) blocks in your
project, and lets you select which to export. It then opens a browser
tab with those blocks in XML format, or stores directly to your local
disk, as with the Export project option. Block libraries can be imported
with the Import option or by dragging the file onto the Snap*!* window.
This option is shown only if you have defined custom blocks.

The Unused blocks... option presents a listing of all the global custom
blocks in your project that aren't used anywhere, and offers to delete
them. As with Export blocks, you can choose a subset to delete with
checkboxes. This option is shown only if you have defined custom blocks.

The Hide blocks... option shows *all* blocks, including primitives, with
checkboxes. This option does not remove any blocks from your project,
but it does hide selected block in your palette. The purpose of the
option is to allow teachers to present students with a simplified
Snap*!* with some features effectively removed. The hiddenness of
primitives is saved with each project, so students can load a shared
project and see just the desired blocks. But users can always unhide
blocks by choosing this option and unclicking all the checkboxes.
(Right-click in the background of the dialog box to get a menu from
which you can check all boxes or uncheck all boxes.)

The New category... option allows you to add your own categories to the
palette. It opens a dialog box in which you specify a name *and a color*
for the category. (A lighter version of the same color will be used for
the zebra coloring feature.)

The Remove a category... option appears only if you've created custom
categories. It opens a very small, easy-to-miss menu of category names
just under the file icon in the menu bar. If you remove a category that
has blocks in it, all those blocks are also removed.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image993.png){width="1.1666666666666667in"
height="0.19791666666666666in"}The next group of options concern the
*scenes* feature, new in Snap*!* 7.0. A scene is a complete project,
with its own stage, sprites, and code, but several can be merged into
one project, using the block to bring another scene onscreen. The
Scenes... option presents a menu of all the scenes in your project,
where the File menu was before you clicked it. The New scene option
creates a new, empty scene, which you can rename as you like from its
context menu. Add scene... is like Import... but for scenes. (A complete
project can be imported as a scene into another project, so you have to
specify that you're importing the project *as a scene* rather than
replacing the current project.)

The Libraries... option presents a menu of useful, optional block
libraries:![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image385.png){width="7.401388888888889in"
height="3.238888888888889in"}

When you click on the one-line description of a library, you are shown
the actual blocks in the library and a longer explanation of its
purpose. You can browse the libraries to find one that will satisfy your
needs. The libraries are described in detail in Section I.H, page 25.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image994.png){width="4.28125in"
height="3.2395833333333335in"}The Costumes... option opens a browser
into the costume library:

You can import a single costume by clicking it and then clicking the
Import button. Alternatively, you can import more than one costume by
double-clicking each one, and then clicking Cancel when done. Notice
that some costumes are tagged with "svg" in this picture; those are
vector-format costumes that are not (yet) editable within Snap*!*.

If you have the stage selected in the sprite corral, rather than a
sprite, the Costumes... option changes to a Backgrounds... option, with
different choices in the browser:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image995.png){width="4.28125in"
height="3.2395833333333335in"}The costume and background libraries
include both bitmap (go jagged if enlarged) and vector (enlarge
smoothly) images. Thanks to Scratch 2.0/3.0 for most of these images!
Some older browsers refuse to import a vector image, but instead convert
it to bitmap.

The Sounds... option opens the third kind of media browser:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image996.png){width="4.28125in"
height="3.2395833333333335in"}The Play buttons can be used to preview
the sounds.

Finally, the Undelete sprites... option appears only if you have deleted
a sprite; it allows you to recover a sprite that was deleted by accident
(perhaps intending to delete only a costume).

### The Cloud Menu

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image997.png){width="1.4368055555555554in"
height="0.7597222222222222in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image998.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image489.png){width="0.6645833333333333in"
height="0.1673611111111111in"}The cloud icon shows a menu of options
relating to your Snap*!* cloud account. If you are not logged in, you
see the outline icon and get this menu:

Choose Login... if you have a Snap*!* account and remember your
password. Choose Signup... if you don't have an account. Choose Reset
Password... if you've forgotten your password or just want to change it.
You will then get an email, at the address you gave when you created
your account, with a new temporary password. Use that password to log
in, then you can choose your own password, as shown below. Choose Resend
Verification Email... if you have just created a Snap*!* account but
can't find the email we sent you with the link to verify that it's
really your email. (If you still can't find it, check your spam folder.
If you are using a school email address, your school may block incoming
email from outside the school.) The Open in Community Site option
appears only if you have a project open; it takes you to the community
site page about that project.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1001.png){width="1.6111111111111112in"
height="0.6527777777777778in"}If you are already logged in, you'll see
the solid icon
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1002.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"} and get this menu:

Logout is obvious, but has the additional benefit of showing you who's
logged in. Change password... will ask for your old password (the
temporary one if you're resetting your password) and the new password
you want, entered twice because it doesn't echo. Open in Community Site
is the same as above.

###  The Settings Menu

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1003.png){width="1.2479166666666666in"
height="2.5833333333333335in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1004.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}The settings icon shows a menu of Snap*!*
options, either for the current project or for you permanently,
depending on the option:

The Language... option lets you see the Snap*!* user interface (blocks
and messages) in a language other than English. (Note: Translations have
been provided by Snap*!* users. If your native language is missing, send
us an email!)

The Zoom blocks\... option lets you change the size of blocks, both in
the palettes and in scripts. The standard size is 1.0 units. The main
purpose of this option is to let you take very high-resolution pictures
of scripts for use on posters. It can also be used to improve
readability when projecting onto a screen while lecturing, but bear in
mind that it doesn't make the palette or script areas any wider, so your
computer's command-option-+ feature may be more practical. Note that a
zoom of 2 is gigantic! Don't even try 10.

The Fade blocks... option opens a dialog in which you can change the
appearance of blocks:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1005.png){width="7.4847222222222225in"
height="2.577777777777778in"}Mostly this is a propaganda aid to use on
people who think that text languages are somehow better or more grown up
than block languages, but some people do prefer less saturated block
colors. You can use the pulldown menu for preselected fadings, use the
slider to see the result as you change the fading amount, or type a
number into the text box once you've determined your favorite value.

The Stage size... option lets you set the size of the *full-size* stage
in pixels. If the stage is in half-size or double-size (presentation
mode), the stage size values don't change; they always reflect the
full-size stage.

The Microphone resolution... option sets the buffer size used by the
microphone block in Settings. "Resolution" is an accurate name if you
are getting frequency domain samples; the more samples, the narrower the
range of frequencies in each sample. In the time domain, the buffer size
determines the length of time over which samples are collected.

The remaining options let you turn various features on and off. There
are three groups of checkboxes. The first is for temporary settings not
saved in your project nor in your user preferences.

The JavaScript extensions option enables the use of the JavaScript
function block. Because malicious projects could use JavaScript to
collect private information about you, or to delete or modify your saved
projects, you must enable JavaScript *each time* you load a project that
uses it.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1015.png){width="1.1895833333333334in"
height="0.18958333333333333in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1016.png){width="1.229861111111111in"
height="0.25972222222222224in"}The Extension blocks option adds two
blocks to the palette:

These blocks provide assorted capabilities to official libraries that
were formerly implemented with the JavaScript function block. This
allows these libraries to run without requiring the JavaScript
extensions option. Details are subject to change.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1017.png){width="1.104861111111111in"
height="2.0833333333333335in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1018.png){width="1.6388888888888888in"
height="0.4131944444444444in"}Input sliders provides an alternate way to
put values in numeric input slots; if you click in such a slot, a slider
appears that you can control with the mouse:

The range of the slider will be from 25 less than the input's current
value to 25 more than the current value. If you want to make a bigger
change than that, you can slide the slider all the way to either end,
then click on the input slot again, getting a new slider with a new
center point. But you won't want to use this technique to change the
input value from 10 to 1000, and it doesn't work at all for non-integer
input ranges. This feature was implemented because software keyboard
input on phones and tablets didn't work at all in the beginning, and
still doesn't work perfectly on Android devices, so sliders provide a
workaround. It has since found another use in providing "lively"
response to input changes; if Input sliders is checked, reopening the
settings menu will show an additional option called Execute on slider
change. If this option is also checked, then changing a slider in the
scripting area automatically runs the script in which that input
appears. The project live-tree in the Examples collection shows how this
can be used; it features a fractal tree custom block with several
inputs, and you can see how each input affects the picture by moving a
slider.

Turbo mode makes many projects run much faster, at the cost of not
keeping the stage display up to date. (Snap*!* ordinarily spends most of
its time drawing sprites and updating variable watchers, rather than
actually carrying out the instructions in your scripts.) So turbo mode
isn't a good idea for a project with glide blocks or one in which the
user interacts with animated characters, but it's great for drawing a
complicated fractal, or computing the first million digits of 𝜋, so that
you don't need to see anything until the final result. While in turbo
mode, the button that normally shows a green flag instead shows a green
lightning bolt. (But when ⚑ clicked hat blocks still activate when the
button is clicked.)

Visible stepping enables the slowed-down script evaluation described in
Chapter I. Checking this option is equivalent to clicking the footprint
button above the scripting area. You don't want this on except when
you're actively debugging, because even the fastest setting of the
slider is still slowed a lot.

Log pen vectors tells Snap*!* to remember lines drawn by sprites as
exact vectors, rather than remember only the pixels that the drawing
leaves on the stage. This remembered vector picture can be used in two
ways: First, right-clicking on a pen trails block gives an option to
relabel it into a pen vectors block which, when run, reports the logged
lines as a vector (svg) costume. Second, right-clicking on the stage
when there are logged vectors shows an extra option, svg..., that
exports a picture of the stage in vector format. Only lines are logged,
not color regions made with the fill block.

The next group of four are user preference options, preserved when you
load a new project. Long form input dialog, if checked, means that
whenever a custom block input name is created or edited, you immediately
see the version of the input name dialog that includes the type options,
default value setting, etc., instead of the short form with just the
name and the choice between input name and title text. The default
(unchecked) setting is definitely best for beginners, but more
experienced Snap*!* programmers may find it more convenient always to
see the long form.

Plain prototype labels eliminates the plus signs between words in the
Block Editor prototype block. This makes it harder to add an input to a
custom block; you have to hover the mouse where the plus sign would have
been, until a single plus sign appears temporarily for you to click on.
It's intended for people making pictures of scripts in the block editor
for use in documentation, such as this manual. You probably won't need
it otherwise.

Clicking sound causes a really annoying sound effect whenever one block
snaps next to another in a script. Certain very young children, and our
colleague Dan Garcia, like this, but if you are such a child you should
bear in mind that driving your parents or teachers crazy will result in
you not being allowed to use Snap*!*. It might, however, be useful for
visually impaired users.

Flat design changes the "skin" of the Snap*!* window to a really hideous
design with white and pale-grey background, rectangular rather than
rounded buttons, and monochrome blocks (rather than the shaded, somewhat
3D-looking normal blocks). The monochrome blocks are the reason for the
"flat" in the name of this option. The only thing to be said for this
option is that, because of the white background, it may blend in better
with the rest of a web page when a Snap*!* project is run in a frame in
a larger page. (I confess I used it to make the picture of blocks faded
all the way to just text two pages ago, though.)

The final group of settings change the way Snap*!* interprets your
program; they are saved with the project, so anyone who runs your
project will experience the same behavior. Thread safe scripts changes
the way Snap*!* responds when an event (clicking the green flag, say)
starts a script, and then, while the script is still running, the same
event happens again. Ordinarily, the running process stops where it is,
ignoring the remaining commands in the script, and the entire script
starts again from the top. This behavior is inherited from Scratch, and
some converted Scratch projects depend on it; that's why it's the
default. It's also sometimes the right thing, especially in projects
that play music in response to mouse clicks or keystrokes. If a note is
still playing but you ask for another one, you want the new one to start
right then, not later after the old process finishes. But if your script
makes several changes to a database and is interrupted in the middle,
the result may be that the database is inconsistent. When you select
Thread safe scripts, the same event happening again in the middle of
running a script is simply ignored. (This is arguably still not the
right thing; the event should be remembered and the script run again as
soon as it finishes. We'll probably get around to adding that choice
eventually.) Keyboard events (when \_\_ key pressed) are always
thread-safe.

Flat line ends affects the drawing of thick lines (large pen width).
Usually the ends are rounded, which looks best when turning corners.
With this option selected, the ends are flat. It's useful for drawing a
brick wall or a filled rectangle.

Codification support enables a feature that can translate a Snap*!*
project to a text-based (rather than block-based) programming language.
The feature doesn't know about any particular other language; instead,
you can provide a translation for each primitive block using these
special blocks:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1019.png){width="3.120644138232721in"
height="0.5451388888888888in"}

Using these primitive blocks, you can build a block library to translate
into any programming language. Watch for such libraries to be added to
our library collection (or contribute one). To see some examples, open
the project "Codification" in the Examples project list. Edit the blocks
map to Smalltalk, map to JavaScript, etc., to see examples of how to
provide translations for blocks.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1021.png){width="2.209722222222222in"
height="4.969444444444444in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1022.png){width="1.38in"
height="4.79in"}The Single palette option puts all blocks, regardless of
category, into a single palette. It's intended mainly for use by
curriculum developers building *Parsons problems:* projects in which
only a small set of blocks are provided, and the task is to arrange
those blocks to achieve a set goal. In that application, this option is
combined with the hiding of almost all primitive blocks. (See page 119.)
When Single palette is turned on, two additional options (initially on)
appear in the settings menu; the Show categories option controls the
appearance of the palette category names such as
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1023.png){width="0.36in" height="0.16in"}
and ![A picture containing logo Description automatically
generated](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1024.png){width="0.33in"
height="0.18in"}, while the Show buttons option controls the appearance
of the ![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1025.png){width="0.61in"
height="0.16in"} and
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1026.png){width="0.53in" height="0.16in"}
buttons in the palette.

The HSL pen color model option changes the set pen, change pen, and pen
blocks to provide menu options hue, saturation, and lightness instead of
hue, saturation, and brightness (a/k/a value). Note: the name
"saturation" means something different in HSL from in HSV! See Appendix
A for all the information you need about colors.

The Disable click-to-run option tells Snap*!* to ignore user mouse
clicks on blocks and scripts if it would ordinarily run the block or
script. (Right-clicking and dragging still work, and so does clicking in
an input slot to edit it.) This is another Parsons problem feature; the
idea is that there will be buttons displayed that run code only in
teacher-approved ways. But kids can uncheck the checkbox. ☺︎

### Visible Stepping Controls

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image121.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}After the menu buttons you'll see the
project name. After that comes the footprint button used to turn on
visible stepping and, when it's on, the slider to control the speed of
stepping.

### Stage Resizing Buttons

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1027.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1028.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1029.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1030.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}Still in the tool bar, but above the left
edge of the stage, are two buttons that change the size of the stage.
The first is the shrink/grow button. Normally it looks like this:
Clicking the button displays the stage at half-normal size horizontally
and vertically (so it takes up ¼ of its usual area). When the stage is
half size the button looks like this: and clicking it returns the stage
to normal size. The main reason you'd want a half size stage is during
the development process, when you're assembling scripts with wide input
expressions and the normal scripting area isn't wide enough to show the
complete script. You'd typically then switch back to normal size to try
out the project. The next presentation mode button normally looks like
this: Clicking the button makes the stage double size in both dimensions
and eliminates most of the other user interface elements (the palette,
the scripting area, the sprite corral, and most of the tool bar). When
you open a shared project using a link someone has sent you, the project
starts in presentation mode. While in presentation mode, the button
looks like this: Clicking it returns to normal (project development)
mode.

### Project Control Buttons {#project-control-buttons .ListParagraph}

Above the right edge of the stage are three buttons that control the
running of the project.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1031.png){width="0.38in"
height="0.22in"}Technically, the green flag is no more a project control
than anything else that can trigger a hat block: typing on the keyboard
or clicking on a sprite. But it's a convention that clicking the flag
should start the action of the project from the beginning. It's only a
convention; some projects have no flag-controlled scripts at all, but
respond to keyboard controls instead. Clicking the green flag also
deletes temporary clones.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1032.png){width="0.35in"
height="0.2in"}Whenever any script is running (not necessarily in the
current sprite), the green flag is lit: .

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1033.png){width="0.35in"
height="0.2in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1034.png){width="1.3590277777777777in"
height="0.8840277777777777in"}Shift-clicking the button enters Turbo
mode, and the button then looks like a lightning bolt: . Shift-clicking
again turns Turbo mode off.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1038.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}Scripts can simulate clicking the green
flag by broadcasting the special message
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1039.png){width="0.3055555555555556in"
height="0.3055555555555556in"}.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1040.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1041.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}The pause button suspends running all
scripts. If clicked while scripts are running, the button changes shape
to become a play button: Clicking it while in this form resumes the
suspended scripts. There is also a pause all block in the Control
palette that can be inserted in a script to suspend all scripts; this
provides the essence of a breakpoint debugging capability. The use of
the pause button is slightly different in visible stepping mode,
described in Chapter I.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1042.png){width="0.5486111111111112in"
height="0.17708333333333334in"}The stop button stops all scripts, like
the stop all block. It does *not* prevent a script from starting again
in response to a click or keystroke; the user interface is always
active. There is one exception: generic when blocks will not fire after
a stop until some non-generic event starts a script. The stop button
also deletes all temporary clones.

 The Palette Area
----------------

At the top of the palette area are the eight buttons that select which
palette (which block category) is shown: Motion, Looks, Sound, Pen,
Control, Sensing, Operators, and Variables (which also includes the List
and Other blocks). There are no menus behind these buttons.

### Buttons in the Palette

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1043.png){width="0.2604166666666667in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}Under the eight palette selector buttons,
at the top of the actual palette, are two semi-transparent buttons. The
first is the *search* button, which is equivalent to typing control-F:
It replaces the palette with a search bar into which you can type part
of the title text of the block you're trying to find. To leave this
search mode, click one of the eight palette selectors, or type the
Escape key.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1044.png){width="0.2604166666666667in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}The other button is equivalent to the
"Make a block" button, except that the dialog window that it opens has
the current palette (color) preselected.

### Context Menus for Palette Blocks

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1045.png){width="0.8611111111111112in"
height="0.45902777777777776in"}Most elements of the Snap*!* display can
be control-clicked/right-clicked to show a *context menu,* with items
relevant to that element. If you control-click/right-click a *primitive*
block in the palette, you see this menu:

The help... option displays a box with documentation about the block.
Here's an example:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1046.png){width="1.6229166666666666in"
height="0.8888888888888888in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1047.png){width="3.3222222222222224in"
height="2.4277777777777776in"}If you control-click/right-click a
*custom* (user-defined) block in the palette, you see this menu:

The help... option for a custom block displays the comment, if any,
attached to the custom block's hat block in the Block Editor. Here is an
example of a block with a comment and its help display:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1048.png){width="6.758333333333334in"
height="2.451388888888889in"}If the help text includes a URL, it is
clickable and will open the page in a new tab.

The delete block definition... option asks for confirmation, then
deletes the custom block and removes it from any scripts in which it
appears. (The result of this removal may not leave a sensible script;
it's best to find and correct such scripts *before* deleting a block.)
Note that there is no option to *hide* a custom block; this can be done
in the Block Editor by right-clicking on the hat block.

The duplicate block definition... option makes a *copy* of the block and
opens that copy in the Block Editor. Since you can't have two custom
blocks with the same title text and input types, the copy is created
with "(2)" (or a higher number if necessary) at the end of the block
prototype.

The export block definition... option writes a file in your browser's
downloads directory containing the definition of this block and any
other custom blocks that this block invokes, directly or indirectly. So
the resulting file can be loaded later without the risk of red
Undefined! blocks because of missing dependencies.

The edit... option opens a Block Editor with the definition of the
custom block.

### Context Menu for the Palette Background

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1052.png){width="0.9895833333333334in"
height="0.5895833333333333in"}Right-click/control-click on the grey
*background* of the palette area shows this menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1053.png){width="1.6in"
height="2.1597222222222223in"}The find blocks... option does the same
thing as the magnifying-glass button. The hide blocks... option opens a
dialog box in which you can choose which blocks (custom as well as
primitive) should be hidden. (Within that dialog box, the context menu
of the background allows you to check or uncheck all the boxes at once.)

The make a category... option, which is intended mainly for authors of
snap extensions, lets you add custom *categories* to the palette. It
opens a small dialog window in which you specify a name *and a color*
for the new category:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1054.png){width="1.429861111111111in"
height="2.9097222222222223in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1055.png){width="1.53in"
height="1.13in"}Pick a dark color, because it will be lightened for
zebra coloring when users nest blocks of the same category. Custom
categories are shown below the built-in categories in the category
selector:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1056.png){width="1.35in"
height="1.8395833333333333in"}This example comes from Eckart Modrow's
SciSnap*!* library. Note that the custom category list has its own
scroll bar, which appears if you have more than six custom categories.
Note also that the buttons to select a custom category occupy the full
width of the palette area, unlike the built-in categories, which occupy
only half of the width. Custom categories are listed in alphabetical
order; this is why Prof. Modrow chose to start each category name with a
number, so that he could control their order.

If there are no blocks visible in a category, the category name is
dimmed in the category selector:

Here we see that category foo has blocks in it, but categories bar and
garply are empty. The built-in categories are also subject to dimming,
if all of the blocks of a category are hidden.

**\
Palette Resizing**

At the right end of the palette area, just to the left of the scripting
area, is a resizing
handle![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1057.png){width="1.4166666666666667in"
height="1.5138888888888888in"} that can be dragged rightward to increase
the width of the palette area. This is useful if you write custom blocks
with very long names. You can't reduce the width of the palette below
its standard value.

The Scripting Area
------------------

The scripting area is the middle vertical region of the Snap*!* window,
containing scripts and also some controls for the appearance and
behavior of a sprite. There is always a *current sprite,* whose scripts
are shown in the scripting area. A dark grey rounded rectangle in the
sprite corral shows which sprite (or the stage) is current. Note that
it's only the visible *display* of the scripting area that is "current"
for a sprite; all scripts of all sprites may be running at the same
time. Clicking on a sprite thumbnail in the sprite corral makes it
current. The stage itself can be selected as current, in which case the
appearance is different, with some primitives not shown.

### Sprite Appearance and Behavior Controls

At the top of the scripting area are a picture of the sprite and some
controls for it:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1058.png){width="3.486111111111111in"
height="1.0416666666666667in"}

Note that the sprite picture reflects its rotation, if any. There are
three things that can be controlled here:

1\. The three circular buttons in a column at the left control the
sprite's *rotation* behavior. Sprite costumes are designed to be
right-side-up when the sprite is facing toward the right (direction =
90). If the topmost button is lit, the default as shown in the picture
above, then the sprite's costume rotates as the sprite changes
direction. If the middle button is selected, then the costume is
reversed left-right when the sprite's direction is roughly leftward
(direction between 180 and 359, or equivalently, between -180 and -1).
If the bottom button is selected, the costume's orientation does not
change regardless of the sprite's direction.

2\. The sprite's *name* can be changed in the text box that, in this
picture, says "Sprite."

3\. Finally, if the draggable checkbox is checked, then the user can move
the sprite on the stage by clicking and dragging it. The common use of
this feature is in game projects, in which some sprites are meant to be
under the player's control but others are not.

### Scripting Area Tabs

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1059.png){width="3.0972222222222223in"
height="0.25in"}Just below the sprite controls are three *tabs* that
determine what is shown in the scripting area:

### Scripts and Blocks Within Scripts

Most of what's described in this section also applies to blocks and
scripts in a Block Editor.

Clicking on a script (which includes a single unattached block) runs it.
If the script starts with a hat block, clicking on the script runs it
even if the event in the hat block doesn't happen. (This is a useful
debugging technique when you have a dozen sprites and they each have
five scripts with green-flag hat blocks, and you want to know what a
single one of those scripts does.) The script will have a green "halo"
around it while it's running. If the script is shared with clones, then
while it has the green halo it will also have a count of how many
instances of the script are running. Clicking a script with such a halo
*stops* the script. (If the script includes a warp block, which might be
inside a custom block used in the script, then Snap*!* may not respond
immediately to clicks.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1060.png){width="0.3333333333333333in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}If a script is shown with a *red* halo,
that means that an error was caught in that script, such as using a list
where a number was needed, or vice versa. Clicking the script will turn
off the halo.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1061.png){width="0.3125in"
height="0.23958333333333334in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1062.png){width="0.3333333333333333in"
height="0.2604166666666667in"}If any blocks have been dragged into the
scripting area, then in its top right corner you'll see an *undo* and/or
*redo* button that can be used to undo or redo block and script drops.
When you undo a drop into an input slot, whatever used to be in the slot
is restored. The redo button appears once you've used undo.

The third button starts keyboard editing mode (Section D, page 130).

Control-click/right-clicking a primitive block within a script shows a
menu like this one:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1063.png){width="0.6208333333333333in"
height="1.0625in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1064.png){width="0.6263888888888889in"
height="1.0902777777777777in"}

command block: reporter block:

The help... option shows the help screen for the block, just as in the
palette. The other options appear only when a block is
right-clicked/control-clicked in the scripting area.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1065.png){width="1.53in"
height="2.13in"}Not every primitive block has a relabel... option. When
present, it allows the block to be replaced by another, similar block,
keeping the input expressions in place. For example, here's what happens
when you choose relabel... for an arithmetic operator:

Note that the inputs to the existing -- block are displayed in the menu
of alternatives also. Click a block in the menu to choose it, or click
outside the menu to keep the original block. Note that the last three
choices are not available in the palette; you must use the relabel
feature to access them.

Not every reporter has a compile option; it exists only for the higher
order functions. When selected, a lightning bolt appears before the
block name:
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1066.png){width="1.4027777777777777in"
height="0.2013888888888889in"} and Snap*!* tries to compile the function
inside the ring to JavaScript, so it runs at primitive speed. This works
only for simple functions (but the higher order function still works
even if the compilation doesn't). The function to be compiled must be
quick, because it will be uninterruptable; in particular, if it's an
infinite loop, you may have to quit your browser to recover. Therefore,
**save your project before** you experiment with the compilation
feature. The right-click menu for a compiled higher order function will
have an uncompile option. This is an experimental feature.

The duplicate option for a command block makes a copy of the *entire
script* starting from the selected block. For a reporter, it copies only
that reporter and its inputs. The copy is attached to the mouse, and you
can drag it to another script (or even to another Block Editor window),
even though you are no longer holding down the mouse button. Click the
mouse to drop the script copy.

The block picture underneath the word duplicate for a command block is
another duplication option, but it duplicates only the selected block,
not everything under it in the script. Note that if the selected block
is a C-shaped control block, the script inside its C-shaped slot is
included. If the block is at the end of its script, this option does not
appear. (Use duplicate instead.)

The extract option removes the selected block from the script and leaves
you holding it with the mouse. In other words, it's like the block
picture option, but it doesn't leave a copy of the block in the original
script. If the block is at the end of its script, this option does not
appear. (Just grab the block with the mouse.) A shorthand for this
operation is to *shift-click* and drag out the block.

The delete option deletes the selected block from the script.

The add comment option creates a comment, like the same option in the
background of the scripting area, but attaches it to the block you
clicked.

The script pic... option saves a picture of the entire script, not just
from the selected block to the end, into your download folder; or, in
some browsers, opens a new browser tab containing the picture. In the
latter case, you can use the browser's Save feature to put the picture
in a file. This is a super useful feature if you happen to be writing a
Snap*!* manual! (If you have a Retina display, consider turning off
Retina support before making script pictures; if not, they end up huge.)
For reporters not inside a script, there is an additional result pic...
option that calls the reporter and includes a speech balloon with the
result in the picture. Note: The downloaded file is a "smart picture":
It also contains the code of the script, as if you'd exported the
project. If you later drag the file into the costumes tab, it will be
loaded as a costume. But if you drag it into the *scripts* tab, it will
be loaded as a script, which you can drop wherever you want it in the
scripting area.

If the script does *not* start with a hat block, or you clicked on a
reporter, then there's one more option: ringify (and, if there is
already a grey ring around the block or script, unringify). Ringify
surrounds the block (reporter) or the entire script (command) with a
grey ring, meaning that the block(s) inside the ring are themselves
data, as an input to a higher order procedure, rather than something to
be evaluated within the script. See Chapter VI, Procedures as Data.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1067.png){width="0.9736111111111111in"
height="1.2986111111111112in"}Clicking a *custom* block in a script
gives a similar but different menu:

The relabel... option for custom blocks shows a menu of other same-shape
custom blocks with the same inputs. At present you can't relabel a
custom block to a primitive block or vice versa. The two options at the
bottom, for custom blocks only, are the same as in the palette. The
other options are the same as for primitive commands.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1068.png){width="0.88125in"
height="1.0833333333333333in"}If a reporter block is in the scripting
area, possibly with inputs included, but not itself serving as input to
another block, then the menu is a little different again:

What's new here is the result pic... option. It's like script pic... but
it includes in the picture a speech balloon with the result of calling
the block.

Broadcast and broadcast and wait blocks in the scripting area have an
additional option: receivers.... When clicked, it causes a momentary (be
looking for it when you click!) halo around the picture in the sprite
corral of those sprites that have a when I receive hat block for the
same message. Similarly, when I receive blocks have a senders... option
that light up the sprite corral icons of sprites that broadcast the same
message.

**Scripting Area Background Context Menu**

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1069.png){width="1.2895833333333333in"
height="1.2777777777777777in"}Control-click/right-click on the grey
striped background of the scripting area gives this menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1062.png){width="0.8416666666666667in"
height="0.18819444444444444in"}The undrop option is a sort of "undo"
feature for the common case of dropping a block somewhere other than
where you meant it to go. It remembers all the dragging and dropping
you've done in this sprite's scripting area (that is, other sprites have
their own separate drop memory), and undoes the most recent, returning
the block to its former position, and restoring the previous value in
the relevant input slot, if any. Once you've undropped something, the
redrop option appears, and allows you to repeat the operation you just
undid. These menu options are equivalent to the and buttons described
earlier.

The clean up option rearranges the position of scripts so that they are
in a single column, with the same left margin, and with uniform spacing
between scripts. This is a good idea if you can't read your own project!

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1072.png){width="1.3888888888888888in"
height="0.7083333333333334in"}The add comment option puts a comment box,
like the picture to the right, in the scripting area. It's attached to
the mouse, as with duplicating scripts, so you position the mouse where
you want the comment and click to release it. You can then edit the text
in the comment as desired.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1073.png){width="1.3888888888888888in"
height="0.2361111111111111in"}You can drag the bottom right corner of
the comment box to resize it. Clicking the arrowhead at the top left
changes the box to a single-line compact form, , so that you can have a
number of collapsed comments in the scripting area and just expand one
of them when you want to read it in full.

If you drag a comment over a block in a script, the comment will be
attached to the block with a yellow line:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1074.png){width="1.4861111111111112in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1075.png){width="3.3333333333333335in"
height="0.9333333333333333in"}Comments have their own context menu, with
obvious meanings:

Back to the options in the menu for the background of the scripting area
(picture on the previous page):

The scripts pic... option saves, or opens a new browser tab with, a
picture of *all* scripts in the scripting area, just as they appear, but
without the grey striped background. Note that "all scripts in the
scripting area" means just the top-level scripts of the current sprite,
not other sprites' scripts or custom block definitions. This is also a
"smart picture"; if you drag it into the scripting area, it will *create
a new sprite* with those scripts in its scripting area.

Finally, the make a block... option does the same thing as the "Make a
block" button in the palettes. It's a shortcut so that you don't have to
keep scrolling down the palette if you make a lot of blocks.

### Controls in the Costumes Tab

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1076.png){width="1.9631944444444445in"
height="2.1319444444444446in"}If you click on the word "Costumes" under
the sprite controls, you'll see something like this:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1077.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.21666666666666667in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1078.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}The Turtle costume is always present in
every sprite; it is costume number 0. Other costumes can be painted
within Snap*!* or imported from files or other browser tabs if your
browser supports that. Clicking on a costume selects it; that is, the
sprite will look like the selected costume. Clicking on the paint brush
icon\
opens the *Paint Editor,* in which you can create a new costume.
Clicking on the camera icon opens a window in which you see what your
computer's camera is seeing, and you can take a picture (which will be
the full size of the stage unless you shrink it in the Paint Editor).
This works only if you give Snap*!* permission to use the camera, and
maybe only if you opened Snap*!* in secure (HTTPS) mode, and then only
if your browser loves you.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1079.png){width="3.5694444444444446in"
height="3.1805555555555554in"} *Brian's bedroom when he's staying at
Paul's house.*

Control-clicking/right-clicking on the turtle picture gives this menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1080.png){width="1.0555555555555556in"
height="0.9027777777777778in"}In this menu, you choose the turtle's
*rotation point,* which is also the point from which the turtle draws
lines. The two pictures below show what the stage looks like after
drawing a square in each mode; tip (otherwise known as "Jens mode") is
on the left in the pictures below, middle ("Brian mode") on the right:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1081.png){width="3.134027777777778in"
height="1.1743055555555555in"}As you see, "tip" means the front tip of
the arrowhead; "middle" is not the middle of the shaded region, but
actually the middle of the four vertices, the concave one. (If the shape
were a simple isosceles triangle instead of a fancier arrowhead, it
would mean the midpoint of the back edge.) The advantage of tip mode is
that the sprite is less likely to obscure the drawing. The advantage of
middle mode is that the rotation point of a sprite is rarely at a tip,
and students are perhaps less likely to be confused about just what will
happen if you ask the turtle to turn 90 degrees from the position shown.
(It's also the traditional rotation point of the Logo turtle, which
originated this style of drawing.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1085.png){width="0.9833333333333333in"
height="1.3194444444444444in"}Costumes other than the turtle have a
different context menu:

The edit option opens the Paint Editor on this costume. The rename
option opens a dialog box in which you can rename the costume. (A
costume's initial name comes from the file from which it was imported,
if any, or is something like costume5.) Duplicate makes a copy of the
costume, in the same sprite. (Presumably you'd do that because you
intend to edit one of the copies.) Delete is obvious. The get blocks
option appears only for a smart costume, and brings its script to the
scripting area. The export option saves the costume as a file on your
computer, in your usual downloads folder.

You can drag costumes up and down in the Costumes tab in order to
renumber them, so that next costume will behave as you prefer.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1086.png){width="1.2804921259842519in"
height="0.8694444444444445in"}If you drag a *smart picture* of a script
into the Costumes tab, its icon will display the text "\</\>" in the
corner to remind you that it includes code:

Its right-click menu will have an extra get blocks option that switches
to the Scripts tab with the script ready to be dropped there.

### The Paint Editor

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1088.png){width="3.938888888888889in"
height="2.577777777777778in"}Here is a picture of a Paint Editor window:

If you've used any painting program, most of this will be familiar to
you. Currently, costumes you import can be edited only if they are in a
bitmap format (png, jpeg, gif, etc.). There is a vector editor, but it
works only for creating a costume, not editing an imported vector (svg)
picture. Unlike the case of the Block Editor, only one Paint Editor
window can be open at a time.

The ten square buttons in two rows of five near the top left of the
window are the *tools.* The top row, from left to right, are the
paintbrush tool, the outlined rectangle tool, the outlined ellipse tool,
the eraser tool, and the rotation point tool. The bottom row tools are
the line drawing tool, the solid rectangle tool, the solid ellipse tool,
the floodfill tool, and the eyedropper tool. Below the tools is a row of
four buttons that immediately change the picture. The first two change
its overall size; the next two flip the picture around horizontally or
vertically. Below these are a color palette, a greyscale tape, and
larger buttons for black, white, and transparent paint. Below these is a
solid bar displaying the currently selected color. Below that is a
picture of a line showing the brush width for painting and drawing, and
below that, you can set the width either with a slider or by typing a
number (in pixels) into the text box. Finally, the checkbox constrains
the line tool to draw horizontally or vertically, the rectangle tools to
draw squares, and the ellipse tools to draw circles. You can get the
same effect temporarily by holding down the shift key, which makes a
check appear in the box as long as you hold it down. (But the Caps Lock
key doesn't affect it.)

You can correct errors with the undo button, which removes the last
thing you drew, or the clear button, which erases the entire picture.
(Note, it does *not* revert to what the costume looked like before you
started editing it! If that's what you want, click the Cancel button at
the bottom of the editor.) When you're finished editing, to keep your
changes, click OK.

Note that the ellipse tools work more intuitively than ones in other
software you may have used. Instead of dragging between opposite corners
of the rectangle circumscribing the ellipse you want, so that the
endpoints of your dragging have no obvious connection to the actual
shape, in Snap*!* you start at the center of the ellipse you want and
drag out to the edge. When you let go of the button, the mouse cursor
will be on the curve. If you drag out from the center at 45 degrees to
the axes, the resulting curve will be a circle; if you drag more
horizontally or vertically, the ellipse will be more eccentric. (Of
course if you want an exact circle you can hold down the shift key or
check the checkbox.) The rectangle tools, though, work the way you
expect: You start at one corner of the desired rectangle and drag to the
opposite corner.

Using the eyedropper tool, you can click anywhere in the Snap*!* window,
even outside the Paint Editor, and the tool will select the color at the
mouse cursor for use in the Paint Editor. You can only do this once,
because the Paint Editor automatically selects the paintbrush when you
choose a color. (Of course you can click on the eyedropper tool button
again.)

The only other non-obvious tool is the rotation point tool. It shows in
the Paint Editor where the sprite's current rotation center is (the
point around which it turns when you use a turn block); if you click or
drag in the picture, the rotation point will move where you click.
(You'd want to do this, for example, if you want a character to be able
to wave its arm, so you use two sprites connected together. You want the
rotation point of the arm sprite to be at the end where it joins the
body, so it remains attached to the shoulder while waving.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1089.png){width="3.8361111111111112in"
height="2.548611111111111in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1090.png){width="0.2152777777777778in"
height="0.2152777777777778in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1091.png){width="0.2152777777777778in"
height="0.2152777777777778in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1092.png){width="0.2152777777777778in"
height="0.2152777777777778in"}The vector editor's controls are much like
those in the bitmap editor. One point of difference is that the bitmap
editor has two buttons for solid and outline rectangles, and similarly
for ellipses, but in the vector editor there is always an edge color and
a fill color, even if the latter is "transparent paint," and so only one
button per shape is needed. Since each shape that you draw is a separate
layer (like sprites on the stage), there are controls to move the
selected shape up (frontward) or down (rearward) relative to other
shapes. There is a selection tool to drag out a rectangular area and
select all the shapes within that area.

### 

### Controls in the Sounds Tab

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1093.png){width="0.35in"
height="0.2in"}There is no Sound Editor in Snap*!*, and also no current
sound the way there's a current costume for each sprite. (The sprite
always has an appearance unless hidden, but it doesn't sing unless
explicitly asked.) So the context menu for sounds has only rename,
delete, and export options, and it has a clickable button labeled Play
or Stop as appropriate. There is a sound *recorder,* which appears if
you click the red record button ( ):

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1094.png){width="2.325in"
height="1.0333333333333334in"}The first, round button starts recording.
The second, square button stops recording. The third, triangular button
plays back a recorded sound. If you don't like the result, click the
round button again to re-record. When you're satisfied, push the Save
button. If you need a sound editor, consider the free (both senses)
<http://audacity.sourceforge.net>.

Keyboard Editing
----------------

An ongoing area of research is how to make visual programming languages
usable by people with visual or motoric disabilities. As a first step in
this direction, we provide a keyboard editor, so that you can create and
edit scripts without tracking the mouse. So far, not every user
interface element is controllable by keyboard, and we haven't even begun
providing *output* support, such as interfacing with a speech
synthesizer. This is an area in which we know we have a long way to go!
But it's a start. The keyboard editor may also be useful to anyone who
can type faster than they can drag blocks.

### Starting and stopping the keyboard editor

There are three ways to start the keyboard editor. Shift-clicking
anywhere in the scripting area will start the editor at that point:
either editing an existing script or, if you shift-click on the
background of the scripting area, editing a new script at the mouse
position. Alternatively, typing shift-enter will start the editor on an
existing script, and you can use the tab key to switch to another
script. Or you can click the keyboard button at the top of the scripting
area.

When the script editor is running, its position is represented by a
blinking white bar:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1095.png){width="2.2083333333333335in"
height="1.59375in"}To leave the keyboard editor, type the escape key, or
just click on the background of the scripting area.

### Navigating in the keyboard editor

To move to a different script, type the tab key. Shift-tab to move
through the scripts in reverse order.

A script is a vertical stack of command blocks. A command block may have
input slots, and each input slot may have a reporter block in it; the
reporter may itself have input slots that may have other reporters. You
can navigate through a script quickly by using the up arrow and down
arrow keys to move between command blocks. Once you find the command
block that you want to edit, the left and right arrow keys move between
editable items within that command. (Left and right arrow when there are
no more editable items within the current command block will move up or
down to another command block, respectively.) Here is a sequence of
pictures showing the results of repeated right arrow keys starting from
the position shown above:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1096.png){width="7.313888888888889in"
height="1.2527777777777778in"}You can rearrange scripts within the
scripting area from the keyboard. Typing shift-arrow keys (left, right,
up, or down) will move the current script. If you move it onto another
script, the two won't snap together; the one you're moving will overlap
the one already there. This means that you can move across another
script to get to a free space.

### Editing a script

Note that the keyboard editor *focus,* the point shown as a white bar or
halo, is either *between* two command blocks or *on* an input slot. The
editing keys do somewhat different things in each of those two cases.

The backspace key deletes a block. If the focus is between two commands,
the one *before* (above) the blinking bar is deleted. If the focus is on
an input slot, the reporter in that slot is deleted. (If that input slot
has a default value, it will appear in the slot.) If the focus is on a
*variadic* input (one that can change the number of inputs by clicking
on arrowheads), then *one* input slot is deleted. (When you right-arrow
into a variadic input, the focus first covers the entire thing,
including the arrowheads; another right-arrow focuses on the first slot
within that input group. The focus is "on the variadic input" when it
covers the entire thing.)

The enter key does nothing if the focus is between commands, or on a
reporter. If the focus is on a variadic input, the enter key adds one
more input slot. If the focus is on a white input slot (one that doesn't
have a reporter in it), then the enter key selects that input slot for
*editing;* that is, you can type into it, just as if you'd clicked on
the input slot. (Of course, if the focus is on an input slot containing
a reporter, you can use the backspace key to delete that reporter, and
then use the enter key to type a value into it.) When you finish typing
the value, type the enter key again to accept it and return to
navigation, or the escape key if you decide not to change the value
already in the slot.

The space key is used to see a menu of possibilities for the input slot
in focus. It does nothing unless the focus is on a single input slot. If
the focus is on a slot with a pulldown menu of options, then the space
key shows that menu. (If it's a block-colored slot, meaning that only
the choices in the menu can be used, the enter key will do the same
thing. But if it's a white slot with a menu, such as in the turn blocks,
then enter lets you type a value, while space shows the menu.)
Otherwise, the space key shows a menu of variables available at this
point in the script. In either case, use the up and down arrow keys to
navigate the menu, use the enter key to accept the highlighted entry, or
use the escape key to leave the menu without choosing an option.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1104.png){width="1.5347222222222223in"
height="1.6944444444444444in"}Typing any other character key (not
special keys on fancy keyboards that do something other than generating
a character) activates the *block search palette.* This palette, which
is also accessible by typing control-F or command-F outside the keyboard
editor, or by clicking the search button floating at the top of the
palette, has a text entry field at the top, followed by blocks whose
title text includes what you type. The character key you typed to start
the block search palette is entered into the text field, so you start
with a palette of blocks containing that character. Within the palette,
blocks whose titles *start* with the text you type come first, then
blocks in which *a word* of the title starts with the text you type, and
finally blocks in which the text appears inside a word of the title.
Once you have typed enough text to see the block you want, use the arrow
keys to navigate to that block in the palette, then enter to insert that
block, or escape to leave the block search palette without inserting the
block. (When not in the keyboard editor, instead of navigating with the
arrow keys, you drag the block you want into the script, as you would
from any other palette.)

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1105.png){width="2.8333333333333335in"
height="0.8409722222222222in"}If you type an arithmetic operator (+-\*/)
or comparison operator (\<=\>) into the block search text box, you can
type an arbitrarily complicated expression, and a collection of
arithmetic operator blocks will be constructed to match:

As the example shows, you can also use parentheses for grouping, and
non-numeric operands are treated as variables or primitive functions. (A
variable name entered in this way may or may not already exist in the
script. Only round and the ones in the pulldown menu of the sqrt block
can be used as function names.)

### Running the selected script

Type control-shift-enter to run the script with the editor focus, like
clicking the script.

Controls on the Stage
---------------------

The stage is the area in the top right of the Snap*!* window in which
sprites move.

### Sprites

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1106.png){width="0.6013888888888889in"
height="1.0833333333333333in"}Most sprites can be moved by clicking and
dragging them. (If you have unchecked the draggable checkbox for a
sprite, then dragging it has no effect.) Control-clicking/right-clicking
a sprite shows this context menu:

The duplicate option makes another sprite with copies of the same
scripts, same costumes, etc., as this sprite. The new sprite starts at a
randomly chosen position different from the original, so you can see
quickly which is which. The new sprite is *selected:* It becomes the
current sprite, the one shown in the scripting area. The clone option
makes a permanent clone of this sprite, with some shared attributes, and
selects it.

The delete option deletes the sprite. It's not just hidden; it's gone
for good. (But you can undelete it by clicking the wastebasket just
below the right edge of the stage.) The edit option selects the sprite.
It doesn't actually change anything about the sprite, despite the name;
it's just that making changes in the scripting area will change this
sprite.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1107.png){width="0.6527777777777778in"
height="0.8888888888888888in"}The move option shows a "move handle"
inside the sprite (the diagonal striped square in the middle):

You can ordinarily just grab and move the sprite without this option,
but there are two reasons you might need it: First, it works even if the
"draggable" checkbox above the scripting area is unchecked. Second, it
works for part sprites relative to their anchor; ordinarily, dragging a
part moves the entire nested sprite.

The rotate option displays a rotation menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1108.png){width="0.9333333333333333in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}You can choose one of the four compass
directions in the lower part (the same as in the point in direction
block) or use the mouse to rotate the handle on the dial in 15°
increments.

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1109.png){width="0.6527777777777778in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}The pivot option shows a crosshair inside
the sprite:

You can click and drag the crosshair anywhere onstage to set the
costume's pivot point. (If you move it outside the sprite, then turning
the sprite will revolve as well as rotate it around the pivot.) When
done, click on the stage not on the crosshair. Note that, unlike moving
the pivot point in the Paint Editor, this technique does not visibly
move the sprite on the stage. Instead, the values of x position and y
position will change.

The edit option makes this the selected sprite, highlighting it in the
sprite corral and showing its scripting area. If the sprite was a
temporary clone, it becomes permanent.

The export... option saves, or opens a new browser tab containing, the
XML text representation of the sprite. (Not just its costume, but all of
its costumes, scripts, local variables and blocks, and other
properties.) You can save this tab into a file on your computer, and
later import the sprite into another project. (In some browsers, the
sprite is directly saved into a file.)

### ![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1110.png){width="0.9583333333333334in" height="1.4479166666666667in"}Variable watchers

Right-clicking on a variable watcher shows this menu:

The first section of the menu lets you choose one of three
visualizations of the watcher:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1111.png){width="2.3159722222222223in"
height="0.3263888888888889in"}

The first (normal) visualization is for debugging. The second (large) is
for displaying information to the user of a project, often the score in
a game. And the third (slider) is for allowing the user to control the
program behavior interactively. When the watcher is displayed as a
slider, the middle section of the menu allows you to control the range
of values possible in the slider. It will take the minimum value when
the slider is all the way to the left, the maximum value when all the
way to the right.

The third section of the menu allows data to be passed between your
computer and the variable. The import... option will read a computer
text file. Its name must end with .txt, in which case the text is read
into the variable as is, or .csv or .json, in which case the text is
converted into a list structure, which will always be a two-dimensional
array for csv (comma-separated values) data, but can be any shape for
json data. The raw data... option prevents that conversion to list form.
The export... option does the opposite conversion, passing a text-valued
variable value into a .txt file unchanged, but converting a list value
into csv format if the list is one- or two-dimensional, or into json
format if the list is more complicated. (The scalar values within the
list must be numbers and/or text; lists of blocks, sprites, costumes,
etc. cannot be exported.)

An alternative to using the import... option is simply to drag the file
onto the Snap*!* window, in which case a variable will be created if
necessary with the same name as the file (but without the extension).

If the value of the variable is a list, then the menu will include an
additional blockify option; clicking it will generate an expression with
nested list blocks that, if evaluated, will reconstruct the list. It's
useful if you imported a list and then want to write code that will
construct the same list later.

###  The stage itself

Control-clicking/right-clicking on the stage background (that is,
anywhere on the stage except on a sprite or watcher) shows the stage's
own context menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1117.png){width="0.8215277777777777in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}The stage's edit option selects the stage,
so the stage's scripts and backgrounds are seen in the scripting area.
Note that when the stage is selected, some blocks, especially the Motion
ones, are not in the palette area because the stage can't move.

The show all option makes all sprites visible, both in the sense of the
show block and by bringing the sprite onstage if it has moved past the
edge of the stage.

The pic... option saves, or opens a browser tab with, a picture of
everything on the stage: its background, lines drawn with the pen, and
any visible sprites. What you see is what you get. (If you want a
picture of just the background, select the stage, open its costumes tab,
control-click/right-click on a background, and export it.)

The pen trails option creates a new costume for the currently selected
sprite consisting of all lines drawn on the stage by the pen of any
sprite. The costume's rotation center will be the current position of
the sprite.

If you previously turned on the log pen vectors option, and there are
logged vectors, the menu includes an extra option, svg..., that exports
a picture of the stage in vector format. Only lines are logged, not
color regions made with the fill block.

The Sprite Corral and Sprite Creation Buttons
---------------------------------------------

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1077.png){width="0.37916666666666665in"
height="0.20555555555555555in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1118.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1119.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.16666666666666666in"}Between the stage and the sprite corral
at the bottom right of the Snap*!* window is a dark grey bar containing
three buttons at the left and one at the right. The first three are used
to create a new sprite. The first button makes a sprite with just the
turtle costume, with a randomly chosen position and pen color. (If you
hold down the Shift key while clicking, the new sprite's direction will
also be random.) The second button makes a sprite and opens the Paint
Editor so that you can make your own costume for it. (Of course you
could click the first button and then click the paint button in its
costumes tab; this paint button is a shortcut for all that.) Similarly,
the third button uses your camera, if possible, to make a costume for
the new sprite.

The trash can button
![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1120.png){width="0.2916666666666667in"
height="0.1736111111111111in"} at the right has two uses. You can drag a
sprite thumbnail onto it from the sprite corral to delete that sprite,
or you can click it to undelete a sprite you deleted by accident.

In the sprite corral, you click on a sprite's "thumbnail" picture to
select that sprite (to make it the one whose scripts, costumes, etc. are
shown in the scripting area). You can drag sprite thumbnails (but not
the stage one) to reorder them; this has no special effect on your
project, but lets you put related ones next to each other, for example.
Double-clicking a thumbnail flashes a halo around the actual sprite on
the stage.

You can right-click/control-click a sprite's thumbnail to get this
context menu:

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1121.png){width="0.6770833333333334in"
height="1.1090277777777777in"}The show option makes the sprite visible,
if it was hidden, and also brings it onto the stage, if it had moved
past the stage boundary. The next three options are the same as in the
context menu of the actual sprite on the stage, discussed above.

The parent... option displays a menu of all other sprites, showing which
if any is this sprite's parent, and allowing you to choose another
sprite (replacing any existing parent). The release option is shown only
if this sprite is a (permanent, or it wouldn't be in the sprite corral)
clone; it changes the sprite to a temporary clone. (The name is supposed
to mean that the sprite is released from the corral.) The export...
option exports the sprite, like the same option on the stage.

The context menu for the stage thumbnail has only one option, pic...,
which takes a picture of everything on the stage, just like the same
option in the context menu of the stage background. If pen trails are
being logged, there will also be an svg... option.

If your project includes scenes, then under the stage icon in the sprite
corral will be the *scene corral:*

![](/snap-manual/assets/images/image1122.png){width="3.3333333333333335in"
height="1.7083333333333333in"}Clicking on a scene will select it;
right-clicking will present a menu in which you can rename, delete, or
export the scene.

Preloading a Project when Starting Snap*!*
------------------------------------------

There are several ways to include a pointer to a project in the URL when
starting Snap*!* in order to load a project automatically. You can think
of such a URL as just running the project rather than as running
Snap*!*, especially if the URL says to start in presentation mode and
click the green flag. The general form is

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#***verb***:***project***&***flag***&***flag***...

The "verb" above can be any of open, run, cloud, present, or dl. The
last three are for shared projects in the Snap*!* cloud; the first two
are for projects that have been exported and made available anywhere on
the Internet.

Here's an example that loads a project stored at the Snap*!* web site
(not the Snap*!* cloud!):

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#open:http://snap.berkeley.edu/snapsource/Examples/vee.xml

The project file will be opened, and Snap*!* will start in edit mode
(with the program visible). Using \#run: instead of \#open: will start
in presentation mode (with only the stage visible) and will "start" the
project by clicking the green flag. ("Start" is in quotation marks
because there is no guarantee that the project includes any scripts
triggered by the green flag. Some projects are started by typing on the
keyboard or by clicking a sprite.)

If the verb is run, then you can also use any subset of the following
flags:

&editMode Start in edit mode, not presentation mode.

&noRun Don't click the green flag.

&hideControls Don't show the row of buttons above the stage (edit mode,
green flag, pause, stop).

&lang=fr Set language to (in this example) French.

&noCloud Don't allow cloud operations from this project (for running
projects from unknown

sources that include JavaScript code)

&noExitWarning When closing the window or loading a different URL, don't
show the browser

"are you sure you want to leave this page" message.

&blocksZoom=n Like the Zoom blocks option in the Settings menu.

The last of these flags is intended for use on a web page in which a
Snap*!* window is embedded.

Here's an example that loads a shared (public) project from the Snap*!*
cloud:

http://snap.berkeley.edu/run\#present:Username=jens&ProjectName=tree%20animation

(Note that "Username" and "ProjectName" are TitleCased, even though the
flags such as "noRun" are camelCased. Note also that a space in the
project name must be represented in Unicode as %20.) The verb present
behaves like run: it ordinarily starts the project in presentation mode,
but its behavior can be modified with the same four flags as for run.
The verb cloud (yes, we know it's not a verb in its ordinary use)
behaves like open except that it loads from the Snap*!* cloud rather
than from the Internet in general. The verb dl (short for "download")
does not start Snap*!* but just downloads a cloud-saved project to your
computer as an .xml file. This is useful for debugging; sometimes a
defective project that Snap*!* won't run can be downloaded, edited, and
then re-saved to the cloud.

Mirror Sites
------------

If the site snap.berkeley.edu is ever unavailable, you can load Snap*!*
at the following mirror sites:

-   http://bjc.edc.org/snapsource/snap.html

-   http://cs10.org/snap

 Appendix A. Snap*!* color library {#appendix-a.-snap-color-library .ListParagraph}
